 
 ''Castle Rackrent'' is a short novel by Maria Edgeworth published in 1800 in literature|1800. Unlike many of her other novels, which were heavily  " edited "  by her father, before their publication, the published version is close to her original intention. 
 
 Shortly before its publication, an introduction, glossary and footnotes, written in the voice of an English narrator, were added to the original text to blunt the negative impact the Edgeworths feared the book might have on English enthusiasm for the Act of Union 1800.    
 
 ==Plot summary== 
 The novel is set prior to the Constitution of 1782 and tells the story of four generations of Rackrent heirs through their steward, Thady Quirk. The heirs are: the dissipated spendthrift Sir Patrick O'Shaughlin, the litigious Sir Murtagh Rackrent, the cruel husband and gambling absentee Sir Kit Rackrent, and the generous but improvident Sir Condy Rackrent. Their sequential mismanagement of the estate is resolved through the machinations—and to the benefit—of the narrator's astute son, Jason Quirk. 
 
 ==Themes and style== 
 Kathryn Kirkpatrick suggests that the novel  " both borrows from and originates a variety of literary genres and subgenres without neatly fitting into any one of them " .   It satirises Anglo-Irish landlords and their overall mismanagement of the estates they owned at a time when the English and Irish parliaments were working towards formalising their union through the Acts of Union. Through this and other works, Edgeworth is credited with serving the political, national interests of Ireland and the United Kingdom the way Sir Walter Scott did for Scotland.  Todd, Janet (2006) ''The Cambridge introduction to Jane Austen'', Cambridge, Cambridge University Press  
 
 ''Castle Rackrent'' is a dialogic novel, comprising a preface and conclusion by an editor bookending a first person narrative proper. It is  widely regarded as the first British novel to use the device of a narrator who is both Unreliable narrator|unreliable and an observer of, rather than a player in, the actions he chronicles.  It also has a glossary (which was a last-minute addition).  
 
 == Importance == 
 ''Castle Rackrent'' is sometimes regarded as the first historical novel, the first regional novel in English, the first Anglo-Irish novel, the first Big House novel and the first saga novel.  Kirkpatrick, Kathryn J. (1995)  " Introduction to ''Castle Rackrent'' " , Oxford, Oxford University Press   W. B. Yeats|William Butler Yeats pronounced ''Castle Rackrent''  " one of the most inspired chronicles written in English " .  William Butler Yeats|W. B. Yeats, ''Representative Irish Tales'' (1891; Atlantic Highlands, NJ, 1979), 27.     
 
 The novel is alluded to in ''The Great Gatsby'' by F. Scott Fitzgerald. 
 
 ==References== 
  
 
 ==External links== 
  
  
 *  
 
  
 
  
 
 Category:1800 British novels 
 Category:Family saga novels 
 Category:British historical novels 
 Category:Novels by Maria Edgeworth 
 Category:Satirical novels 
 Category:Irish historical novels 
 Category:18th-century Irish novels 
 Category:1800 debut novels