 
 
 ''Farnham's Freehold'' is a science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. A serialised version, edited by Frederik Pohl, appeared in ''Worlds of If'' magazine (July, August, October 1964). The complete version was published in novel form by G. P. Putnam's Sons|G.P. Putnam later in 1964. 
 
 ''Farnham's Freehold'' is a Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic science fiction|post-apocalyptic tale. The setup for the story is a direct hit by a nuclear weapon, which sends into the future a fallout shelter containing Farnham, his wife, son, daughter, daughter's friend, and domestic servant. In writing the novel Heinlein drew on his experience of building a fallout shelter under his own house in Colorado Springs, Colorado in the 1960s. 
 
 ==Plot== 
 Hugh Farnham, a white middle-aged man, holds a bridge club party for his alcoholic wife Grace, law-graduate son Duke, college-student daughter Karen, and Karen's friend Barbara. During the Contract bridge|bridge game, Duke berates Hugh for frightening Grace by preparing for a possible Soviet Union|Soviet nuclear attack. When the attack actually occurs the group, along with Joe, the family's African Americans|African American servant, retreat to the fallout shelter beneath the house. 
 
 After several distant nuclear explosions rock the shelter, Hugh and Barbara become sexually intimate, after which the largest explosion of all hits the shelter. With only minor injuries, but with their bottled oxygen running low, the group decides to ensure that they will be able to leave the shelter when necessary. After exiting through an emergency tunnel, they find themselves in a completely undamaged, semi-tropical region apparently uninhabited by humans or other sentient creatures. Several of the group speculate that the final explosion somehow forced them into an Multiverse|alternate dimension. 
 
 The group struggles to stay alive by reverting to the ways of the American pioneer|American pioneers, with Hugh as the leader—despite friction between Hugh and Duke. Karen announces that she is pregnant and had returned home the night of the attack to tell her parents. Barbara also announces that she is pregnant, but without mentioning that her pregnancy resulted from her sexual encounter with Hugh during the attack. Karen eventually dies during her labor, due to complications, along with her infant daughter the next day. 
 
 Grace, whose sanity has been challenged by all these events, demands that Barbara be forced from the group or she will leave. Duke convinces Hugh that he will go with Grace to ensure her safety, but before they can leave, a large aircraft appears overhead. The group is taken captive by people of African ancestry, but is spared execution when Joe intervenes by conversation with their captives' leader in French language|French. 
 
 The group finds that it has not been transported to another world, but instead is in the Future history|distant future of their own world. A decadent but technologically advanced African culture keeps either uneducated or castrated White people|whites as slaves.  Each of the characters adapts to the sudden change in black/white roles in different and sometimes shocking ways. In the end, Hugh and Barbara reject the new era of slavery they find themselves in and attempt to escape, but are captured. Rather than execute them, Ponse,  " Lord Protector "  of the house to which they have been enslaved, asks them to volunteer for a Time travel|time-travel experiment that will send them back to their own time. 
 
 They return just prior to the original nuclear attack, and flee in Barbara's car. As they drive they realize that while Barbara had driven a car with an automatic transmission, this car—the same car in every other respect—has a manual transmission, and Farnham deduces that the time-travel experiment worked but sent them into an Parallel universes in fiction|alternate universe. 
 
 They gather supplies and flee into the hills, surviving the attack, and live out the rest of their lives. 
 
 ==Contemporary reception== 
 Reception of the book was mixed. Positive reviews described the work as  " fresh and exciting .... and thoroughly entertaining "      and a  " fine piece of writing, "      or at least  " light, palatable but not filling. "     
 
 On the other hand, ''Kirkus Reviews'' stated that the  " characters have souls of wood pulp " , and that  " The satire on fall-out shelters, race and sex lacks inspiration. "  [ FARNHAM'S FREEHOLD, by Robert A. Heinlein], at Kirkus Reviews; originally published June 15, 1964; published online September 25, 2011; retrieved June 16, 2014   ''The New Republic'', while conceding Heinlein's desire to  " show the evils of ethnic oppression " , states that in the process, Heinlein  " resurrected some of the most horrific racial stereotypes imaginable " , ultimately producing  " an anti-racist novel only a Ku Klux Klan|Klansman could love " .   [ A Famous Science Fiction Writer's Descent Into Libertarian Madness], by Jeet Heer; at the ''the New Republic|New Republic''; published June 8, 2014; retrieved June 14, 2014  
 
 ==Legacy== 
 The name  " freeholders "  was adopted by some survivalists in the 1980s in reference to the novel.     
 
 ==References== 
  
 
 ==External links== 
 * 
 * 
 * ''Farnham's Freehold'' [ parts one], [ two], and [ three] on the Internet Archive 
 
  
 
 Category:Post-apocalyptic novels 
 Category:1964 American novels 
 Category:Novels by Robert A. Heinlein 
 Category:Novels about time travel 
 Category:1964 science fiction novels 
 Category:Novels first published in serial form 
 Category:Works originally published in If (magazine) 
 Category:G. P. Putnam's Sons books