 
  
  
  
  
  
 | oclc           = 3163777 
 | dewey          = 823.8 
 | congress       = 
 | set_in         = Northern England, early 19th century 
 | pages           = 
 | media_type = Print 
 | followed_by    = Shirley (novel)|''Shirley'' 
 | wikisource = Jane Eyre (c. 1900 W. Nicholson  &  Sons edition) 
 }} 
 
 ''Jane Eyre''  (originally published as ''Jane Eyre: An Autobiography'') is a novel by List of English writers|English writer Charlotte Brontë, published under the pen name  " Currer Bell " , on 16 October 1847, by Smith, Elder  &  Co. of London. The first American edition was published the following year by Harper (publisher)|Harper  &  Brothers of New York.     ''Jane Eyre'' is a ''Bildungsroman'' which follows the experiences of its Jane Eyre (character)|eponymous heroine, including her growth to adulthood and her love for Mr. Rochester, the brooding master of Thornfield Hall.    
 
 The novel revolutionised Prose|prose fiction by being the first to focus on its protagonist's moral and spiritual development through an intimate first-person narrative, where actions and events are coloured by a psychological intensity. Charlotte Brontë has been called the  " first historian of the private consciousness " , and the literary ancestor of writers like Marcel Proust|Proust and James Joyce|Joyce.    
 
 The book contains elements of social criticism with a strong sense of Christianity|Christian morality at its core, and it is considered by many to be ahead of its time because of Jane's individualistic character and how the novel approaches the topics of Class discrimination|class, Human sexuality|sexuality, religion, and feminism.        It, along with Jane Austen's ''Pride and Prejudice'', is one of the most famous romance novels of all time.    
 
 ==Plot== 
 ''Jane Eyre'' is divided into 38 chapters. It was originally Three-volume novel|published in three volumes in the 19th century, comprising chapters 1 to 15, 16 to 27, and 28 to 38. 
 
 The second edition was dedicated to William Makepeace Thackeray. 
 
 The novel is a first-person narrative from the perspective of the title character. The novel's setting is somewhere in the north of England, late in the reign of George III of the United Kingdom|George III (1760–1820). It goes through five distinct stages: Jane's childhood at Gateshead Hall, where she is emotionally and physically abused by her aunt and cousins; her education at Lowood School, where she gains friends and role models but suffers privations and oppression; her time as governess at Thornfield Hall, where she falls in love with her mysterious employer, Edward Fairfax Rochester; her time in the Moor House, during which her earnest but cold clergyman cousin, St. John Rivers, proposes to her; and ultimately her reunion with, and marriage to, her beloved Rochester. Throughout these sections, the novel provides perspectives on a number of important social issues and ideas, many of which are critical of the status quo. 
 
 ===Gateshead Hall=== 
 File:P30b.jpg|thumb|right|200px|Young Jane argues with her guardian Mrs. Reed of Gateshead, illustration by F. H. Townsend 
 Jane Eyre, aged 10, lives at Gateshead Hall with her maternal uncle's family, the Reeds, as a result of her uncle's dying wish. Jane was orphaned several years earlier when her parents died of typhus. Mr. Reed, Jane's uncle, was the only member of the Reed family who was ever kind to Jane. Jane's aunt, Sarah Reed, dislikes her, abuses her, and treats her as a burden, and Mrs. Reed discourages her three children from associating with Jane. Jane, as a result, becomes defensive against her cruel judgement. The nursemaid, Bessie, proves to be Jane's only ally in the household, even though Bessie occasionally scolds Jane harshly. Excluded from the family activities, Jane leads an unhappy childhood, with only a doll and books with which to entertain herself. 
 
 One day, as punishment for defending herself against her cousin John Reed, Jane is relegated to the ''red room'' in which her late uncle had died; there, she faints from panic after she thinks she has seen his ghost. The red room is significant because it lays the grounds for the  " ambiguous relationship between parents and children "  which plays out in all of Jane's future relationships with male figures throughout the novel.     She is subsequently attended to by the kindly apothecary Mr. Lloyd to whom Jane reveals how unhappy she is living at Gateshead Hall. He recommends to Mrs. Reed that Jane should be sent to school, an idea Mrs. Reed happily supports. Mrs. Reed then enlists the aid of the harsh Mr. Brocklehurst, who is the director of Lowood Institution, a charity school for girls, to enroll Jane. Mrs. Reed cautions Mr. Brocklehurst that Jane has a  " tendency for deceit " , which he interprets as Jane being a liar. Before Jane leaves, however, she confronts Mrs. Reed and declares that she'll never call her  " aunt "  again. Jane also tells Mrs. Reed and her daughters, Georgiana and Eliza, that they are the ones who are deceitful, and that she will tell everyone at Lowood how cruelly the Reeds treated her. Mrs. Reed is hurt badly by these words, but does not have the courage or tenacity to show this.    
 
 ===Lowood Institution=== 
 At Lowood Institution, a school for poor and orphaned girls, Jane soon finds that life is harsh. She attempts to fit in and befriends an older girl, Helen Burns. During a class session, her new friend is criticised for her poor stance and dirty nails, and receives a lashing as a result. Later, Jane tells Helen that she could not have borne such public humiliation, but Helen philosophically tells her that it would be her duty to do so. Jane then tells Helen how badly she has been treated by Mrs. Reed, but Helen tells her that she would be far happier if she did not bear grudges. In due course, Mr. Brocklehurst visits the school. While Jane is trying to make herself look inconspicuous, she accidentally drops her slate, thereby drawing attention to herself. She is then forced to stand on a stool, and is branded a sinner and a liar. Later, Miss Temple, the caring superintendent, facilitates Jane's self-defence and publicly clears her of any wrongdoing. Helen and Miss Temple are Jane's two main role models who positively guide her development, despite the harsh treatment she has received from many others. 
 
 The 80 pupils at Lowood are subjected to cold rooms, poor meals, and thin clothing. Many students fall ill when a typhus epidemic strikes; Helen dies of Tuberculosis|consumption in Jane's arms. When Mr. Brocklehurst's maltreatment of the students is discovered, several benefactors erect a new building and install a sympathetic management committee to moderate Mr. Brocklehurst's harsh rule. Conditions at the school then improve dramatically. 
 
 === Thornfield Hall === 
  
 After six years as a student and two as a teacher at Lowood, Jane decides to leave in pursuit of a new life, growing bored of her life at Lowood. Her friend and confidante, Miss Temple, also leaves after getting married. Jane advertises her services as a governess in a newspaper. A housekeeper at Thornfield Hall, Alice Fairfax, replies to Jane's advertisement. Jane takes the position, teaching Adèle Varens, a young French girl. 
 
 One night, while Jane is carrying a letter to the post from Thornfield, a horseman and dog pass her. The horse slips on ice and throws the rider. Despite the rider's surliness, Jane helps him get back onto his horse. Later, back at Thornfield, she learns that this man is Edward Rochester, master of the house. Adèle was left in his care when her mother abandoned her. It is not immediately apparent whether Adèle is Rochester's daughter or not. 
 
 At Jane's first meeting with Mr. Rochester, he teases her, accusing her of bewitching his horse to make him fall. Jane stands up to his initially arrogant manner, despite his strange behaviour. Mr. Rochester and Jane soon come to enjoy each other's company, and they spend many evenings together. 
 
 Odd things start to happen at the house, such as a strange laugh being heard, a mysterious fire in Mr. Rochester's room (from which Jane saves Rochester by rousing him and throwing water on him and the fire), and an attack on a house-guest named Mr. Mason. 
 
 After Jane saves Mr. Rochester from the fire, he thanks her tenderly and emotionally, and that night Jane feels strange emotions of her own towards him. The next day however he leaves unexpectedly for a distant party gathering, and several days later returns with the whole party, including the beautiful and talented Blanche Ingram. Jane sees that Blanche and Mr. Rochester favour each other and starts to feel jealous, particularly because she also sees that Blanche is snobbish and heartless. 
 
 Jane then receives word that Mrs. Reed has suffered a stroke and is calling for her. Jane returns to Gateshead and remains there for a month to tend to her dying aunt. Mrs. Reed confesses to Jane that she wronged her, bringing forth a letter from Jane's paternal uncle, Mr. John Eyre, in which he asks for her to live with him and be his heir. Mrs. Reed admits to telling Mr. Eyre that Jane had died of fever at Lowood. Soon afterward, Mrs. Reed dies, and Jane helps her cousins after the funeral before returning to Thornfield. 
 
 Back at Thornfield, Jane broods over Mr. Rochester's rumoured impending marriage to Blanche Ingram. However, one midsummer evening, Rochester baits Jane by saying how much he will miss her after getting married and how she will soon forget him. The normally self-controlled Jane reveals her feelings for him. Rochester then is sure that Jane is sincerely in love with him, and he proposes marriage. Jane is at first skeptical of his sincerity, before accepting his proposal. She then writes to her Uncle John, telling him of her happy news. 
 
 As she prepares for her wedding, Jane's forebodings arise when a strange woman sneaks into her room one night and rips Jane's wedding veil in two. As with the previous mysterious events, Mr. Rochester attributes the incident to Grace Poole, one of his servants. During the wedding ceremony, however, Mr. Mason and a lawyer declare that Mr. Rochester cannot marry because he is already married to Mr. Mason's sister, Bertha. Mr. Rochester admits this is true but explains that his father tricked him into the marriage for her money. Once they were united, he discovered that she was rapidly descending into congenital madness, and so he eventually locked her away in Thornfield, hiring Grace Poole as a nurse to look after her. When Grace gets drunk, Rochester's wife escapes and causes the strange happenings at Thornfield. 
 
 It turns out that Jane's uncle, Mr. John Eyre, is a friend of Mr. Mason's and was visited by him soon after Mr. Eyre received Jane's letter about her impending marriage. After the marriage ceremony is broken off, Mr. Rochester asks Jane to go with him to the south of France and live with him as husband and wife, even though they cannot be married. Jane is tempted but must stay true to her Christian values and beliefs. Refusing to go against her principles, and despite her love for Rochester, Jane leaves Thornfield at dawn before anyone else is up.    
 
 ===Moor House=== 
 File:P323b.jpg|thumb|left|200px|St. John Rivers admits Jane to Moor House, illustration by F. H. Townsend 
 Jane travels as far from Thornfield as she can using the little money she had previously saved. She accidentally leaves her bundle of possessions on the coach and is forced to sleep on the moor. She unsuccessfully attempts to trade her handkerchief and gloves for food. Exhausted and starving, she eventually makes her way to the home of Diana and Mary Rivers, but is turned away by the housekeeper. She collapses on the doorstep, preparing for her death. Clergyman St. John Rivers, Diana and Mary's brother, rescues her. After Jane regains her health, St. John finds her a teaching position at a nearby village school. Jane becomes good friends with the sisters, but St. John remains aloof. 
 
 The sisters leave for governess jobs, and St. John becomes somewhat closer to Jane. St. John learns Jane's true identity and astounds her by telling her that her uncle, John Eyre, has died and left her his entire fortune of 20,000 Pound sterling|pounds (equivalent to just under $1.7 million in 2018  calculated using the UK Retail Price Index:   ). When Jane questions him further, St. John reveals that John Eyre is also his and his sisters' uncle. They had once hoped for a share of the inheritance but were left virtually nothing. Jane, overjoyed by finding that she has living and friendly family members, insists on sharing the money equally with her cousins, and Diana and Mary come back to live at Moor House. 
 
 ===Proposals=== 
 Thinking that the pious and conscientious Jane will make a suitable missionary's wife, St. John asks her to marry him and to go with him to India, not out of love, but out of duty. Jane initially accepts going to India but rejects the marriage proposal, suggesting they travel as brother and sister. As soon as Jane's resolve against marriage to St. John begins to weaken, she mystically hears Mr. Rochester's voice calling her name. Jane then returns to Thornfield to find only blackened ruins. She learns that Mr. Rochester's wife set the house on fire and committed suicide by jumping from the roof. In his rescue attempts, Mr. Rochester lost a hand and his eyesight. Jane reunites with him, but he fears that she will be repulsed by his condition.  " Am I hideous, Jane? " , he asks.  " Very, sir; you always were, you know " , she replies. When Jane assures him of her love and tells him that she will never leave him, Mr. Rochester proposes again, and they are married. They live together in an old house in the woods called Ferndean Manor. Rochester regains sight in one eye two years after his and Jane's marriage, and he sees their newborn son. 
 
 ==Major characters== 
 In order of first line of dialogue: 
 
 ===Chapter 1=== 
 * Jane Eyre (character)|Jane Eyre: The novel's narrator and protagonist, she eventually becomes the second wife of Edward Rochester. Orphaned as a baby, Jane struggles through her nearly loveless childhood and becomes governess at Thornfield Hall. Though facially plain, Jane is passionate and strongly principled, and values freedom and independence. She also has a strong conscience and is a determined Christian. She is ten at the beginning of the novel, and nineteen or twenty at the end of the main narrative. As the final chapter of the novel states that she has been married to Edward Rochester for ten years, she is approximately thirty at its completion. 
 * Mrs. Sarah Reed: (née Gibson) Jane's maternal aunt by marriage, who reluctantly adopted Jane in accordance with her late husband's wishes. According to Mrs. Reed, he pitied Jane and often cared for her more than for his own children. Mrs. Reed's resentment leads her to abuse and neglect the girl. She lies to Mr. Brocklehurst about Jane's tendency to lie, preparing him to be severe with Jane when she arrives at Brocklehurst's Lowood School. 
 * John Reed: Jane's fourteen-year-old first cousin who bullies her incessantly, sometimes in his mother's presence. John eventually ruins himself as an adult by drinking and gambling, and is rumoured to have committed suicide. 
 * Eliza Reed: Jane's thirteen-year-old first cousin. Envious of her more attractive younger sister and a slave to rigid routine, she self-righteously devotes herself to religion. She leaves for a nunnery near Lisle after her mother's death, determined to estrange herself from her sister. 
 * Georgiana Reed: Jane's eleven-year-old first cousin. Although beautiful and indulged, she is insolent and spiteful. Her elder sister Eliza foils Georgiana's marriage to the wealthy Lord Edwin Vere, when the couple is about to elope. Georgiana eventually marries a  " wealthy worn-out man of fashion. " 
 * Bessie Lee: The nursemaid at Gateshead. She often treats Jane kindly, telling her stories and singing her songs, but she has a quick temper. Later, she marries Robert Leaven with whom she has three children. 
 * Miss Martha Abbot: Mrs. Reed's maid at Gateshead. She is unkind to Jane and tells Jane she has less right to be at Gateshead than a servant does. 
 
 ===Chapter 3=== 
 * Mr. Lloyd: A compassionate apothecary who recommends that Jane be sent to school. Later, he writes a letter to Miss Temple confirming Jane's account of her childhood and thereby clears Jane of Mrs. Reed's charge of lying. 
 
 ===Chapter 4=== 
 * Mr. Brocklehurst: The clergyman, director, and treasurer of Lowood School, whose maltreatment of the pupils is eventually exposed. A religious traditionalist, he advocates for his charges the most harsh, plain, and disciplined possible lifestyle, but, hypocritically, not for himself and his own family. His second daughter, Augusta, exclaimed,  " Oh, dear papa, how quiet and plain all the girls at Lowood look… they looked at my dress and mama's, as if they had never seen a silk gown before. " 
 
 ===Chapter 5=== 
 * Miss Maria Temple: The kind superintendent of Lowood School, who treats the pupils with respect and compassion. She helps clear Jane of Mr. Brocklehurst's false accusation of deceit and cares for Helen in her last days. Eventually, she marries Reverend Naysmith. 
 * Miss Scatcherd: A sour and strict teacher at Lowood. She constantly punishes Helen Burns for her untidiness but fails to see Helen's substantial good points. 
 * Helen Burns: Jane's best friend at Lowood School. She refuses to hate those who abuse her, trusts in God, and prays for peace one day in heaven. She teaches Jane to trust Christianity and dies of consumption in Jane's arms. Elizabeth Gaskell, in her biography of the Brontë sisters, wrote that Helen Burns was 'an exact transcript' of Maria Brontë, who died of consumption at age 11.    
 
 ===Chapter 11=== 
 * Mrs. Alice Fairfax: The elderly, kind widow and the housekeeper of Thornfield Hall; distantly related to the Rochesters. 
 * Adèle Varens:.}} An excitable French child to whom Jane is a governess at Thornfield. Adèle's mother was a dancer named Céline. She was Mr. Rochester's mistress and claimed that Adèle was Mr. Rochester's daughter, though he refuses to believe it due to Céline's unfaithfulness and Adèle's apparent lack of resemblance to him. Adèle seems to believe that her mother is dead (she tells Jane in chapter 11,  " I lived long ago with mamma, but she is gone to the Holy Virgin " ). Mr Rochester later tells Jane that Céline actually abandoned Adèle and  " ran away to Italy with a musician or singer "  (ch. 15). Adèle and Jane develop a strong liking for one another, and although Mr. Rochester places Adèle in a strict school after Jane flees Thornfield, Jane visits Adèle after her return and finds a better, less severe school for her. When Adèle is old enough to leave school, Jane describes her as  " a pleasing and obliging companion – docile, good-tempered and well-principled " , and considers her kindness to Adèle well repaid. 
 * Grace Poole:  " …a woman of between thirty and forty; a set, square-made figure, red-haired, and with a hard, plain face… "  Mr. Rochester pays her a very high salary to keep his mad wife, Bertha, hidden and quiet. Grace is often used as an explanation for odd happenings at the house such as strange laughter that was heard not long after Jane arrived. She has a weakness for drinking that occasionally allows Bertha to escape. 
 
 ===Chapter 12=== 
 * Edward Fairfax Rochester: The master of Thornfield Hall. A Byronic hero, he has a face  " dark, strong, and stern. "  He married Bertha Mason years before the novel begins. 
 * Leah: The housemaid at Thornfield Hall. 
 
 ===Chapter 17=== 
 * Blanche Ingram: Young socialite whom Mr. Rochester plans to marry. Though possessing great beauty and talent, she treats social inferiors, Jane in particular, with undisguised contempt.  Mr. Rochester exposes her and her mother's mercenary motivations when he puts out a rumour that he is far less wealthy than they imagine. 
 
 ===Chapter 18=== 
 * Richard Mason: An Englishman whose arrival at Thornfield Hall from the West Indies unsettles Mr. Rochester. He is the brother of Rochester's first wife, the woman in the attic, and still cares for his sister's well-being. During the wedding ceremony of Jane and Mr. Rochester, he exposes the bigamous nature of the marriage. 
 
 ===Chapter 21=== 
 * Robert Leaven: The coachman at Gateshead, who brings Jane the news of the death of the dissolute John Reed, an event which has brought on Mrs. Reed's stroke. He informs her of Mrs. Reed's wish to see Jane before she dies. 
 
 ===Chapter 26=== 
 * Bertha Mason|Bertha Antoinetta Mason: The first wife of Edward Rochester. After their wedding, her mental health began to deteriorate, and she is now violent and in a state of intense derangement, apparently unable to speak or go into society. Mr. Rochester, who insists that he was tricked into the marriage by a family who knew Bertha was likely to develop this condition, has kept Bertha locked in the attic at Thornfield for years. She is supervised and cared for by Grace Poole, whose drinking sometimes allows Bertha to escape. After Richard Mason stops Jane and Mr. Rochester's wedding, Rochester finally introduces Jane to Bertha:  " In the deep shade, at the farther end of the room, a figure ran backwards and forwards. What it was, whether beast or human being, one could not, at first sight, tell… it snatched and growled like some strange wild animal: but it was covered with clothing, and a quantity of dark, grizzled hair, wild as a mane, hid its head and face. "  Eventually, Bertha sets fire to Thornfield Hall and throws herself to her death from the roof. Bertha is viewed as Jane's  " double " : Jane is pious and just, while Bertha is savage and animalistic.     Though her race is never mentioned, it is sometimes conjectured that she was of mixed race. Rochester suggests that Bertha's parents wanted her to marry him, because he was of  " good race " , implying that she was not pure white, while he was. There are also references to her  " dark "  hair and  " discoloured "  and  " black "  face.   Carol Atherton, ''The figure of Bertha Mason'' (2014), British Library  Retrieved 30 May 2020.    A number of Victorian writers at the time suggested that madness could result from a racially  " impure "  lineage, compounded by growing up in a tropical West Indian climate.  Keunjung Cho, ''Contextualizing Racialized Interpretations of Bertha Mason's Character'' (English 151, Brown University, 2003)  Retrieved 30 May 2020.  
 
 ===Chapter 28=== 
 * Diana and Mary Rivers: Sisters in a remote house who take Jane in when she is hungry and friendless, having left Thornfield Hall without making any arrangements for herself. Financially poor but intellectually curious, the sisters are deeply engrossed in reading the evening Jane appears at their door. Eventually, they are revealed to be Jane's cousins. They want Jane to marry their stern clergyman brother so that he will stay in England rather than journey to India as a missionary. Diana marries naval Captain Fitzjames, and Mary marries clergyman Mr. Wharton. The sisters remain close to Jane and visit with her and Rochester every year. 
 * Hannah: The kindly housekeeper at the Rivers home;  " …comparable with the Brontes' well-loved servant, Tabitha Aykroyd. " 
 * St. John Eyre Rivers:.}} A handsome, though severe and serious, clergyman who befriends Jane and turns out to be her cousin. St. John is thoroughly practical and suppresses all of his human passions and emotions, particularly his love for the beautiful and cheerful heiress Rosamond Oliver, in favour of good works. He wants Jane to marry him and serve as his assistant on his missionary journey to India. After Jane rejects his proposal, St. John goes to India unmarried. 
 
 ===Chapter 32=== 
 * Rosamond Oliver: A beautiful, kindly, wealthy, but rather simple young woman, and the patron of the village school where Jane teaches. Rosamond is in love with St. John, but he refuses to declare his love for her because she wouldn't be suitable as a missionary's wife. She eventually becomes engaged to the respected and wealthy Mr. Granby. 
 * Mr. Oliver: Rosamond Oliver's wealthy father, who owns a foundry and needle factory in the district.  " …a tall, massive-featured, middle-aged, and grey-headed man, at whose side his lovely daughter looked like a bright flower near a hoary turret. "  He is a kind and charitable man, and he is fond of St. John. 
 
 ==Context== 
 File:The Salutation, Manchester.jpg|thumb|right|The Salutation pub in Hulme, Manchester, where Brontë began to write ''Jane Eyre''; the pub was a lodge in the 1840s.        
 The early sequences, in which Jane is sent to Lowood, a harsh boarding school, are derived from the author's own experiences. Helen Burns's death from tuberculosis (referred to as consumption) recalls the deaths of Charlotte Brontë's sisters, Elizabeth and Maria, who died of the disease in childhood as a result of the conditions at their school, the Clergy Daughters School at Cowan Bridge, near Tunstall, Lancashire. Mr. Brocklehurst is based on Rev. William Carus Wilson (1791–1859), the Evangelical minister who ran the school. Additionally, John Reed's decline into alcoholism and dissolution recalls the life of Charlotte's brother Branwell, who became an opium and alcohol addict in the years preceding his death. Finally, like Jane, Charlotte became a governess. These facts were revealed to the public in ''The Life of Charlotte Brontë'' (1857) by Charlotte's friend and fellow novelist Elizabeth Gaskell.  Stevie Davies, Introduction and Notes to ''Jane Eyre''. Penguin Classics ed., 2006.  
 
 The Gothic manor of Thornfield Hall was probably inspired by North Lees Hall, near Hathersage in the Peak District. This was visited by Charlotte Brontë and her friend Ellen Nussey in the summer of 1845, and is described by the latter in a letter dated 22 July 1845. It was the residence of the Eyre family, and its first owner, Agnes Ashurst, was reputedly confined as a lunatic in a padded second floor room.   It has been suggested that the Wycoller Hall in Lancashire, close to Haworth, provided the setting for Ferndean Manor to which Mr. Rochester retreats after the fire at Thornfield: there are similarities between the owner of Ferndean—Mr. Rochester's father—and Henry Cunliffe, who inherited Wycoller in the 1770s and lived there until his death in 1818; one of Cunliffe's relatives was named Elizabeth Eyre (née Cunliffe).     The sequence in which Mr. Rochester's wife sets fire to the bed curtains was prepared in an August 1830 homemade publication of Brontë's ''The Young Men's Magazine, Number 2''.     Charlotte Brontë began composing ''Jane Eyre'' in Manchester, and she likely envisioned Manchester Cathedral churchyard as the burial place for Jane's parents and the birthplace of Jane herself.  Alexander, Christine, and Sara L. Pearson. ''Celebrating Charlotte Brontë: Transforming Life into Literature in'' Jane Eyre. Brontë Society, 2016, p. 173.  
 
 ==Adaptations and influence== 
  
 File:NBC University Theatre - 19490403 - Jane Eyre.ogg|alt=|thumb|A 1949 adaptation for ''NBC University Theatre'' 
 The novel has been adapted into a number of other forms, including theatre, film, television, and at least two full-length operas, by John Joubert (composer)|John Joubert (1987–1997) and Michael Berkeley (2000). The novel has also been the subject of a number of significant rewritings and related interpretations, notably Jean Rhys's seminal 1966 novel ''Wide Sargasso Sea''.    
 
 On 19 May 2016, Cathy Marston's ballet adaption was premiered by the Northern Ballet at the Cast Theatre in  
 Doncaster, England with Dreda Blow as Jane and Javier Torres as Rochester.    
 
 In November 2016, a manga adaptation by Crystal S. Chan was published by Manga Classics Inc., with artwork by Sunneko Lee.  Manga Classics: Jane Eyre (2016) Manga Classics Inc.      
 
 ==Reception== 
  
 ''Jane Eyre''s initial reception contrasts starkly to its reputation today. In 1848, Elizabeth Rigby (later Elizabeth Eastlake), reviewing ''Jane Eyre'' in Quarterly Review|''The Quarterly Review'', found it  " pre-eminently an anti-Christian composition, "     declaring:  " We do not hesitate to say that the tone of mind and thought which has overthrown authority and violated every code human and divine abroad, and fostered Chartism and rebellion at home, is the same which has also written ''Jane Eyre.'' "  
 
 Literary critic Jerome Beaty believed the close first-person perspective leaves the reader  " too uncritically accepting of her worldview " , and often leads reading and conversation about the novel towards supporting Jane, regardless of how irregular her ideas or perspectives are.  Beaty, Jerome.  " St. John's Way and the Wayward Reader "  in   
 
 In 2003, the novel was ranked number 10 in the BBC's survey The Big Read.    
 
 ==Notes== 
  
 
 ==References== 
  
 
 ==External links== 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 *  
 * [ ''Jane Eyre'' at the British Library] 
 * [ ''Jane Eyre'' at The Victorian Web] 
 * [ ''Jane Eyre''] at the Internet Archive 
  
 *  
 * [ Dating ''Jane Eyre''] 
  
  
 
  
 
 Category:Jane Eyre|  
 Category:1847 British novels 
 Category:British bildungsromans 
 Category:British novels adapted into films 
 Category:British Gothic novels 
 Category:Novels about orphans 
 Category:Victorian novels 
 Category:Works published under a pseudonym 
 Category:Novels set in the 19th century 
 Category:British novels adapted into plays 
 Category:Novels by Charlotte Brontë 
 Category:British novels adapted into television shows 
 Category:Love stories 
 Category:Suicide in fiction 
 Category:Female characters in literature|Eyre, Jane 
 Category:Burn survivors in fiction 
 Category:Harper  &  Brothers books 
 Category:Novels adapted into ballets