 
  
  
  
 ''Of Mice and Men'' is a novella written by John Steinbeck.     [ Who, what, why: Why do children study Of Mice and Men?] on BBC   Published in 1937, it narrates the experiences of George Milton and Lennie Small, two displaced migrant worker|migrant ranch workers, who move from place to place in California in search of new job opportunities during the Great Depression in the United States. 
 
 Steinbeck based the novella on his own experiences working alongside migrant farm workers as a teenager in the 1910s (before the arrival of the Okies that he would describe in ''The Grapes of Wrath''). The title is taken from Robert Burns' poem  " To a Mouse " , which reads:  " The best laid schemes o' mice an' men / Gang aft agley " . (The best laid schemes of mice and men / Often go awry.) 
 
 While it is a book taught in many schools,     ''Of Mice and Men'' has been a frequent target of censorship|censors for vulgarity, and what some consider offensive and racist language; consequently, it appears on the American Library Association's list of the ''Most Challenged Books of 21st Century''.    
 
 ==Plot== 
 Two migrant field workers in California on their plantation during the Great Depression—George Milton, an intelligent but uneducated man, and Lennie Small, a bulky, strong man but Developmental disability|mentally disabled—are in Soledad, California|Soledad on their way to another part of California. They hope to one day attain the dream of settling down on their own piece of land. Lennie's part of the dream is merely to tend and pet rabbits on the farm, as he loves touching soft animals, although he always accidentally kills them. This dream is one of Lennie's favorite stories, which George constantly retells. They had fled from Weed, California|Weed after Lennie grabbed a young woman's skirt and would not let go, leading to an accusation of rape. It soon becomes clear that the two are close and George is Lennie's protector, despite his antics. 
 
 After being hired at a farm, the pair are confronted by Curley—the Boss's small, aggressive son with a Napoleon complex who dislikes larger men. Curley starts to target Lennie. Curley's flirtatious and provocative wife, to whom Lennie is instantly attracted, poses a problem as well. In contrast, the pair also meets Candy, an elderly ranch handyman with one hand and a loyal dog, and Slim, an intelligent and gentle Muleteer|jerkline-skinner whose dog has recently had a Litter (animal)|litter of puppies. Slim gives a puppy to Lennie and Candy, whose loyal, accomplished sheep dog was Animal euthanasia|put down by fellow ranch-hand Carlson. 
 
 In spite of problems, their dream leaps towards reality when Candy offers to pitch in $350 with George and Lennie so that they can buy a farm at the end of the month, in return for permission to live with them. The trio are ecstatic, but their joy is overshadowed when Curley attacks Lennie, who defends himself by easily crushing Curley's fist while urged on by George. 
 
 Nevertheless, George feels more relaxed, to the extent that he even leaves Lennie behind on the ranch while he goes into town with the other ranch hands. Lennie wanders into the stable, and chats with Crooks, the bitter, yet educated stable buck, who is isolated from the other workers due to being black. Candy finds them and they discuss their plans for the farm with Crooks, who cannot resist asking them if he can hoe a garden patch on the farm albeit scorning its possibility. Curley's wife makes another appearance and flirts with the men, especially Lennie. However, her spiteful side is shown when she belittles them and threatens to have Crooks lynching|lynched. 
 
 The next day, Lennie accidentally kills his puppy while stroking it. Curley's wife enters the barn and tries to speak to Lennie, admitting that she is lonely and how her dreams of becoming a movie star are crushed, revealing her personality. After finding out about Lennie's habit, she offers to let him stroke her hair, but panics and begins to scream when she feels his strength. Lennie becomes frightened, and unintentionally breaks her neck thereafter and runs away. When the other ranch hands find the corpse, George realizes that their dream is at an end. George hurries to find Lennie, hoping he will be at the meeting place they designated in case he got into trouble. 
 
 George meets Lennie at their camping spot before they came to the ranch. The two sit together and George retells the beloved story of the dream, knowing it is something they will never share. He then kills Lennie by shooting him, because he sees it as an action in Lennie's best interest. Curley, Slim, and Carlson arrive seconds after. Only Slim realizes what happened, and consolingly leads him away. Curley and Carlson look on, unable to comprehend the subdued mood of the two men. 
 
 ==Characters== 
 
 * George Milton: A quick-witted man who is Lennie's guardian and best friend. His friendship with Lennie helps sustain his dream of a better future. He was bound in teasing Lennie since he was young. He is described by Steinbeck in the novel as  " small and quick, "  every part of him being  " defined, "  with small strong hands on slender arms. He has a dark face and  " restless eyes "  and  " sharp, strong features "  including a  " thin, bony nose. " 
 * Lennie Small: A Developmental disability|mentally disabled, but gigantic and physically strong man who travels with George and is his constant companion.     He dreams of  " living off the fatta' the lan' "  and being able to tend to rabbits. His love for soft things conspires against him, mostly because he does not know his own strength, and eventually becomes his undoing. Steinbeck defines his appearance as George's  " opposite, "  writing that he is a  " huge man, shapeless of face, with large, pale eyes "  and  " wide, sloping shoulders. "  Lennie walks heavily, dragging his feet a little,  " the way a bear drags his paws, "  adding that his arms do not swing at his sides, but hang loosely. 
 * Candy: An aging ranch handyman, Candy lost his hand in an accident and worries about his future on the ranch. Fearing that his age is making him useless, he seizes on George's description of the farm he and Lennie will have, offering his life's savings if he can join George and Lennie in owning the land. 
 * Slim: A  " jerkline skinner, "  the main driver of a mule team and the  " prince of the ranch " . Slim is greatly respected by many of the characters and is the only character whom Curley treats with respect. His insight, intuition, kindness and natural authority draw the other ranch hands automatically towards him, and he is significantly the only character to fully understand the bond between George and Lennie. 
 * Curley: The Boss' son, a young, pugnacious character, once a semi-professional boxer. He is described by others, with some irony, as  " handy " , partly because he likes to keep a glove filled with vaseline on his left hand. He is very jealous and protective of his wife and immediately develops a dislike toward Lennie. At one point, Curley loses his temper after he sees Lennie appear to laugh at him, and ends up with his hand horribly damaged after Lennie fights back against him. 
 * Curley's wife: A young, pretty woman, who is mistrusted by her husband. The other characters refer to her only as  " Curley's wife " . Steinbeck explained that she is  " not a person, she's a symbol. She has no function, except to be a foil & nbsp;– and a danger to Lennie. "   Curley's wife's preoccupation with her own beauty eventually helps precipitate her death: She allows Lennie to stroke her hair as an apparently harmless indulgence, only for her to upset Lennie when she yells at him to stop him 'mussing it'. Lennie tries to stop her yelling and eventually, and accidentally, kills her by breaking her neck. 
 * Crooks: Crooks, the black stable-hand, gets his name from his crooked back. Proud, bitter, and cynical, he is isolated from the other men because of the color of his skin. Despite himself, Crooks becomes fond of Lennie, and though he claims to have seen countless men following empty dreams of buying their own land, he asks Lennie if he can go with them and hoe in the garden. 
 * Candy's dog: A blind dog who is described as  " old " ,  " stinky " , and  " crippled " , and is killed by Carlson. 
 * Carlson: A  " thick bodied "  ranch hand, he kills Candy's dog with little sympathy. 
 * The Boss: Curley's father, the superintendent of the ranch. The ranch is owned by  " a big land company "  according to Candy. 
 * Whit: A young ranch hand. 
 
 ==Themes== 
  
 
 Steinbeck emphasizes dreams throughout the book. George aspires to independence, to be his own boss, to have a homestead, and, most important, to be  " somebody " . Lennie aspires to be with George on his independent homestead, and to quench his Fixation (psychology)|fixation on soft objects. Candy aspires to reassert his responsibility lost with the death of his dog, and for security for his old age—on George's homestead. Crooks aspires to a small homestead where he can express self-respect, security, and most of all, acceptance. Curley's wife dreams to be an actress, to satisfy her desire for fame lost when she married Curley, and an end to her loneliness. 
 
 Loneliness is a significant factor in several characters' lives. Candy is lonely after his dog is gone. Curley's wife is lonely because her husband is not the friend she hoped for—she deals with her loneliness by flirting with the men on the ranch, which causes Curley to increase his abusiveness and jealousy. The companionship of George and Lennie is the result of loneliness. Crooks states the theme candidly as  " A guy goes nuts if he ain't got anybody. Don't make any difference who the guy is, long's he's with you. "  Of Mice and Men, p. 71   The author further reinforces this theme through subtle methods by situating the story near the town of Soledad, California|Soledad, which means  " solitude "  in Spanish.    
 
 Despite the need for companionship, Steinbeck emphasizes how loneliness is sustained through the barriers established from acting inhuman to one another. The loneliness of Curley's wife is upheld by Curley's jealousy, which causes all the ranch hands to avoid her. Crooks's barrier results from being barred from the bunkhouse by restraining him to the stable; his bitterness is partially broken, however, through Lennie's ignorance. 
 
 Steinbeck's characters are often powerless, due to intellectual, economic, and social circumstances. Lennie possesses the greatest physical strength of any character, which should therefore establish a sense of respect as he is employed as a ranch hand. However, his intellectual handicap undercuts this and results in his powerlessness. Economic powerlessness is established as many of the ranch hands are victims of the Great Depression. As George, Candy and Crooks are positive, action- oriented characters, they wish to purchase a homestead, but because of the Depression, they are unable to generate enough money. Lennie is the only one who is basically unable to take care of himself, but the other characters would do this in the improved circumstances they seek. Since they cannot do so, the real danger of Lennie's mental handicap comes to the fore. 
 
 Regarding human interaction, evil of oppression and abuse is a theme that is illustrated through Curley and Curley's wife. Curley uses his aggressive nature and superior position in an attempt to take control of his father's farm. He constantly reprimands the farm hands and accuses some of fooling around with his wife. Curley's Napoleon complex is evidenced by his threatening of the farm hands for minuscule incidents. Curley's wife, on the other hand, is not physically but verbally manipulative. She uses her sex appeal to gain some attention, flirting with the farm hands. According to the Penguin Group|Penguin Teacher's Guide for Of Mice and Men, Curley and Curley's wife represent evil in that both oppress and abuse the migrants in different ways.    
 
 Fate is felt most heavily as the characters' aspirations are destroyed when George is unable to protect Lennie (who is a real danger). Steinbeck presents this as  " something that happened "  or as his friend coined for him  " non-teleological thinking "  or  " is thinking " , which postulates a non-judgmental point of view.   
  
 
 ==Development== 
 ''Of Mice and Men'' was Steinbeck's first attempt at writing in the form of novel-play termed a  " play-novelette "  by one critic. Structured in three acts of two chapters each, it is intended to be both a novella and a script for a play. It is only 30,000 words in length. Steinbeck wanted to write a novel that could be played from its lines, or a play that could be read like a novel.  Burning Bright – in the foreword Steinbeck states that Of Mice and Men and The Moon Is Down were his first two play yo man Shillinglaw   
 
 Steinbeck originally titled it ''Something That Happened'' (referring to the events of the book as  " something that happened "  because nobody can be really blamed for the tragedy that unfolds in the story).  However, he changed the title after reading Robert Burns's poem ''To a Mouse.''     Burns's poem tells of the regret the narrator feels for having destroyed the home of a mouse while plowing his field.    
 
 Steinbeck wrote this book and ''The Grapes of Wrath'' in what is now Monte Sereno, California. An early draft of ''Of Mice and Men'' was eaten by Steinbeck's dog, named Max.    
 
 ==Reception== 
 Attaining the greatest positive response of any of his works up to that time, Steinbeck's novella was chosen as a Book of the Month Club selection before it was published. Praise for the work came from many notable critics, including Maxine Garrard (''Enquirer-Sun''),     Christopher Morley, and Harry Thornton Moore (''New Republic'').     ''New York Times'' critic Ralph Thompson described the novella as a  " grand little book, for all its ultimate melodrama. "       
 
 The novella has been banned from various US public and school libraries or curricula for allegedly  " promoting euthanasia " ,  " condoning 
 racial slurs " , being  " anti-business " , containing profanity, and generally containing  " vulgar "  and  " offensive language " .     Many of the bans and  
 restrictions have been lifted and it remains required reading in many other American, Australian, Irish, British, New Zealand and Canadian  
 high schools. As a result of being a frequent target of censors, ''Of Mice and Men'' appears on the American Library Association's list  
 of the ''Most Challenged Books of the 21st Century'' (number 4).  
    In the UK, it was listed at number 52 of the  " nation's best loved novels "  on the BBC's 2003 survey The Big Read.  [  " The Big Read " ], BBC, April 2003. Retrieved January 12, 2014   ''Of Mice and Men'' has been Book censorship in the United States|challenged (proposed for censorship) 54 times since it was published in 1936.  Doyle,  
 Robert.  " Banned And/or Challenged Books from the Radcliffe Publishing Course Top 100 Novels of the 20th Century. "  ALA.org. American Library Association, 2010. Web. .   However, scholars  
 including Thomas Scarseth have fought to protect the book by arguing its literary value.  According to Scarseth  " in true great literature the  
 pain of Life is transmuted into the beauty of Art. "  Scarseth, Thomas.  " A Teachable Good Book: Of Mice and Men. "  Censored Books: Critical Viewpoints. Ed. Nicholas J. Karolides, Lee Burress, and John M. Kean. Scarecrow Press, 1993. 388–394. Rpt. in Novels for Students. Ed. Diane Telgen. Vol. 1. Detroit: Gale, 1998. Literature Resource Center. Web.  
 
 ==Adaptations== 
  
 
 ===Stage=== 
  
 The first stage production was written by Steinbeck, produced by Sam H. Harris and directed by George S. Kaufman. It opened on November 23, 1937, in the Music Box Theatre on Broadway.     Running for 207 performances, it starred Wallace Ford as George and Broderick Crawford as Lennie.   The role of Crooks was performed by Leigh Whipper, the first African-American member of the Actors' Equity Association.     Whipper repeated this role in the 1939 film version.  
 
 The production was chosen as Best Play in 1938 by the New York Drama Critics' Circle.    
 
 In 1939 the production was moved to Los Angeles, still with Wallace Ford in the role of George, but with Lon Chaney, Jr., taking on the role of Lennie. Chaney's performance in the role resulted in his casting in the movie. 
 
 In 1958, a musical theater adaptation by Ira Bilowit (1925–2016) was produced Off-Broadway in New York City. The cast included several in-demand performers of their day, including Art Lund and Jo Sullivan, re-teamed after performing together in the hit musical ''The Most Happy Fella'', as well as Leo Penn.     However, a newspaper strike negatively affected the production and it closed after six weeks.     A revival of the work was mounted at the Western Stage in Salinas in 2019.  
 
 The play was revived in a 1974 Broadway production in the Brooks Atkinson Theatre starring Kevin Conway (actor)|Kevin Conway as George and James Earl Jones as Lennie.     Noted stage actress Pamela Blair played Curley's Wife in this production. 
 
 In 1970 Carlisle Floyd wrote an Of Mice and Men (opera)|opera based on this novella. One departure between Steinbeck's book and Floyd's opera is that the opera features The Ballad Singer, a character not found in the book.    
 
 A new version of the play opened on Broadway theatre|Broadway at  The Longacre Theater on March 19, 2014 for a limited 18-week engagement, starring James Franco, Chris O'Dowd, Leighton Meester and Jim Norton (Irish actor)|Jim Norton.       
 
 ===Film=== 
 File:Of Mice And Men Poster.jpg|thumb|Poster for the 1939 filmThe Of Mice and Men (1939 film)|first film adaptation was released in 1939, two years after the publication of the novella, and starred Lon Chaney Jr. as Lennie, with Burgess Meredith as George, and was directed by Lewis Milestone.     It was nominated for four Academy Awards.  
 
 A Of Mice and Men (1968 film)|TV version, produced by David Susskind in 1968, starred George Segal as George, Nicol Williamson as Lennie, Will Geer as Candy, Moses Gunn as Crooks, and Don Gordon (actor)|Don Gordon and Joey Heatherton as Curley and his wife, respectively.    
 
 A 1972 Iranian film, ''Topoli (film)|Topoli,'' directed by Reza Mirlohi was adapted from and dedicated to John Steinbeck and his story. 
 
 In 1981, a Television movie|TV movie version was released, starring Randy Quaid as Lennie, and Robert Blake (actor)|Robert Blake as George, and directed by Reza Badiyi.    
 
 Another Of Mice and Men (1992 film)|theatrical film version was made in 1992, directed by Gary Sinise, who was nominated for the Palme d'Or at Cannes.     Sinise also played George in the film, and the role of Lennie was played by John Malkovich. For this adaptation, both men reprised their roles from the 1980 Steppenwolf Theatre Company production.   
  
 
 The 1992 Malayalam cinema|Malayalam film ''Soorya Manasam'' directed by Viji Thampi is also based on the novel.    
 
 ===Radio=== 
 ''Kirsty Williams (drama)#Of Mice and Men|Of Mice and Men'' was adapted by Donna Franceschild as a radio play directed by Kirsty Williams (drama)|Kirsty Williams starring David Tennant and Liam Brennan broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 7 March 2010.  [ BBC – Classic Serial – ''Of Mice and Men'']  
 
 ==References== 
 
 ===Notes=== 
  
 
 ===Bibliography=== 
  
 
 *  
 
  
 
 ==External links== 
  
 * [ Photos of the first edition of ''Of Mice and Men''] 
 *[ 1953 ''Best Plays'' radio adaptation of play version] at Internet Archive 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 Category:Of Mice and Men|  
 Category:John Steinbeck|  
 Category:1937 American novels 
 Category:American novellas 
 Category:American novels adapted into films 
 Category:American novels adapted into plays 
 Category:Great Depression novels 
 Category:Novels adapted into operas 
 Category:Novels by John Steinbeck 
 Category:Novels set in California 
 Category:Salinas Valley