 
  
 | media_type    = Print (hardback and paperback) 
 | pages         = 291 
 | isbn          = 978-0-684-85352-9 
 | preceded_by   = 
 | followed_by   = 
 }} 
 
 ''On Writing: A Memoir of the Craft'' is a memoir by American author Stephen King that describes his experiences as a writer and his advice for aspiring writers. Originally published in 2000 by Charles Scribner's Sons, ''On Writing'' is King's first book after he was involved in a car accident a year earlier. In 2010, Scribner republished the memoir as a 10th anniversary edition, which also featured an updated reading list from King. 
 
 ''On Writing'' is organized into five sections:  " C.V. " , in which King highlights events in his life that influenced his writing career;  " What Writing Is " , in which King urges the reader to take writing seriously;  " Toolbox " , which discusses English mechanics;  " On Writing " , in which King details his advice to aspiring writers; and  " On Living: A Postscript " , in which King describes his van accident and how it affected his life. 
 
 In 2008, ''Entertainment Weekly'' included ''On Writing'' on their  " The New Classics: Books – The 100 best reads from 1983 to 2008 "  list.  [  " The New Classics: Books: The 100 Best Reads from 1983 to 2008 " ] ''Entertainment Weekly'', issue #999–1000, June 27, 2008.   Both Sharon Johnson in ''The Patriot-News'' and Julie Woo for the Associated Press, in separate reviews, praised King's advice as  " solid " .        John Mark Eberhart, writing in the ''Sunday Free Lance-Star'', called King's writing advice  " pedestrian " , but ultimately concluded that ''On Writing'' was  " a slight but transitionally important work that should lead [King] to better things. "    
 
 == Background == 
 Stephen King began composing ''On Writing'' in 1997. After completing the  " C.V. "  and  " Toolbox "  sections, King set aside the manuscript in February or March 1998, explaining in the final section of ''On Writing'' that he was uncertain how or whether he should proceed with the book. In June 1999, King reread the uncompleted draft and became determined to finish it.     
 
 On June 19, 1999, King was hit by a van while walking along Maine State Route 5.        Following the accident, King struggled to return to writing, uncertain whether he would be able to publish another novel. In an interview with NBC, King stated,  " After the accident, I was totally incapable of writing. At first it was as if I'd never done this in my life. ... It was like starting over again from square one. "  
 
 In January 2000, King wrote on his website that he had finished ''On Writing'' and was more optimistic about his career, stating,  " My endurance is much less than it was and my output has been cut in half, but I am working. "     The final section of the book is titled  " On Living: A Postscript " , and it reflects on the accident and details his return to writing, stating  " things have continued to get better. "   ''On Writing'' was the first book King published following his accident.    
 
 == Summary == 
 ''On Writing'' is divided into five sections, each with a different focus. Although the first section, titled  " C.V. "  narrates his life, King states that the section is not an autobiography, but more a curriculum vitae, owing to the sporadic nature of his memories.    " C.V. "  discusses events in King's life that contributed to his development as a writer, such as his early exposure to writing,   his early attempts to be published,   his relationship with his wife,   the death of his mother,   and his history of drug and alcohol abuse.   
 
 The second section is titled  " What Writing Is " . Comparing writing to telepathy, King briefly reintroduces himself and includes an example of description|literary description. King urges the reader to take writing and his advice seriously.   The third section,  " Toolbox " , discusses English mechanics and the importance of vocabulary, grammar, and Style (literature)|style in writing.   The fourth section,  " On Writing " , details King's advice on writing. The fifth and final section,  " On Living: A Postscript " , discusses the accident in 1999 in which King was struck by a van while walking down Maine State Route 5. In the United Kingdom paperback version, a short story by Garret Adams entitled  " Jumper "  was included at the end of the book. The story won the ''On Writing'' competition. 
 
 == Reception == 
 In 2008, ''Entertainment Weekly'' listed ''On Writing'' 21st on their list of  " The New Classics: Books – The 100 best reads from 1983 to 2008 " .  [  " The New Classics: Books: The 100 Best Reads from 1983 to 2008 " ] ''Entertainment Weekly'', issue #999–1000, June 27, 2008.  
 
 Sharon Johnson, in a review published by ''The Patriot-News,'' wrote that King survived his car accident  " with his skill intact " , calling King's advice  " solid "  and  " an unexpected gift to writers and readers. "     Peter Sobczynski, a correspondent for the ''Post-Tribune'', called the book  " a fun, incisive read " , specifically highlighting its emotional power:  " In writing candidly and honestly about his recovery from a trauma that should have killed him, King has never been more affecting. Obviously, it is a good thing he was able to survive and get back into shape on a physical and emotional level. "    
 
 Julie Woo for the Associated Press also called King's advice  " solid " , specifically about dialogue and plot. However, Woo also observed that  " many other books about writing offer such advice and some are more inspirational and ambitious, "  noting how  " King cannot replicate a formula for his success so he does the next best thing by describing his work habits and environment urging that consistency in those areas can be conducive to good writing. "   John Mark Eberhart wrote a mixed review in the ''Sunday Free Lance-Star''. Criticizing King's recommendations on writing, Eberhart remarked that they were  " so pedestrian that I can't remember when I first ran across any of them. "  On the other hand, Eberhart praised ''On Writing''s discussion of King's personal life, stating that  " King's writing about his own alcoholism and cocaine abuse is among the best and most honest prose of his career. "  Eberhart ultimately characterized the book as  " a slight but transitionally important work that should lead [King] to better things. "    
 
 == References == 
  
 
 == External links== 
  
 * 
 
  
 
 Category:2000 non-fiction books 
 Category:American memoirs 
 Category:Books about writing 
 Category:Non-fiction books by Stephen King 
 Category:English-language books