 
   
   }} 
 | orig_lang_code    = ar 
 | language          = Arabic 
 | subject           =  
 | genre             = Frame story, Folklore genre|Folk tales 
 | set_in            = Middle Ages 
 | wikisource        = One Thousand and One Nights 
 }} 
  
 
 ''One Thousand and One Nights'' (, '''')     is a collection of Middle Eastern folk tales compiled in Arabic during the Islamic Golden Age. It is often known in English as the ''Arabian Nights'', from the first English-language edition (c. 1706–1721), which rendered the title as ''The Arabian Nights' Entertainment''.  See illustration of title page of Grub St Edition in Yamanaka and Nishio (p. 225)  
 
 The work was collected over many centuries by various authors, translators, and scholars across West, Central and South Asia, and North Africa. Some tales themselves trace their roots back to ancient and medieval Arabic literature|Arabic, Persian literature|Persian, Sanskrit literature|Indian, Greek literature|Greek, Jewish literature|Jewish and Turkish literature|Turkish     folklore and literature. In particular, many tales were originally folk stories from the Abbasid Caliphate|Abbasid and Mamluk Sultanate (Cairo)|Mamluk eras, while others, especially the frame story, are most probably drawn from the Middle Persian literature# " Pahlavi "  literature|Pahlavi Persian work ''Hezār Afsān'' (, lit. ''A Thousand Tales''), which in turn relied partly on Indian elements.  
  
  
 
 What is common to all the editions of the ''Nights'' is the initial frame story of the ruler Shahryār and his wife Scheherazade and the framing device incorporated throughout the tales themselves. The stories proceed from this original tale; some are framed within other tales, while others are self-contained. Some editions contain only a few hundred nights, while others include 1,001 or more. The bulk of the text is in prose, although verse is occasionally used for songs and riddles and to express heightened emotion. Most of the poems are single couplets or quatrains, although some are longer. 
 
 Some of the stories commonly associated with the ''Arabian Nights''—particularly  " Aladdin|Aladdin's Wonderful Lamp "  and  " Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves " —were not part of the collection in its original Arabic versions but were added to the collection by Antoine Galland after he heard them from the Syrians|Syrian        Maronites|Maronite Christian storyteller Hanna Diyab|Hanna Diab on Diab's visit to Paris.  John Payne, ''Alaeddin and the Enchanted Lamp and Other Stories'', (London 1901) gives details of Galland's encounter with 'Hanna' in 1709 and of the discovery in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris of two Arabic manuscripts containing Aladdin and two more of the added tales. [ Text of  " Alaeddin and the enchanted lamp " ]   Other stories, such as  " Sinbad the Sailor|The Seven Voyages of Sinbad the Sailor " , had an independent existence before being added to the collection. 
 
 ==Synopsis== 
  
 File:Ferdinand Keller - Scheherazade und Sultan Schariar (1880).jpg|thumb|Scheherazade and Shahryār by Ferdinand Keller (painter)|Ferdinand Keller, 1880 
 The main frame story concerns Shahryār  (, from Middle Persian: ''šahr-dār'', 'holder of realm'),     whom the narrator calls a  " Sasanian Empire|Sasanian king "  ruling in  " India and China. "  ''The Arabian Nights'', translated by Malcolm C. Lyons and Ursula Lyons (Penguin Classics, 2008), vol. 1, p. 1   Shahryār is shocked to learn that his brother's wife is unfaithful. Discovering that his own wife's infidelity has been even more flagrant, he has her killed. In his bitterness and grief, he decides that all women are the same. Shahryār begins to marry a succession of virgins only to execute each one the next morning, before she has a chance to dishonor him.  
 
 Eventually the vizier, whose duty it is to provide them, cannot find any more virgins. Scheherazade (, ''Shahrazād'', from Middle Persian: , ''čehr'', 'lineage' + , ''āzād'', 'noble'),      the vizier's daughter, offers herself as the next bride and her father reluctantly agrees. On the night of their marriage, Scheherazade begins to tell the king a tale, but does not end it. The king, curious about how the story ends, is thus forced to postpone her execution in order to hear the conclusion. The next night, as soon as she finishes the tale, she begins another one, and the king, eager to hear the conclusion of that tale as well, postpones her execution once again. This goes on for one thousand and one nights, hence the name. 
 
 The tales vary widely: they include historical tales, love stories, tragedies, comedies, poems, Burlesque (literature)|burlesques, and various forms of erotica. Numerous stories depict jinn, ghouls, apes,  [ The Third Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman – The Arabian Nights – The Thousand and One Nights – Sir Richard Burton translator]. Classiclit.about.com (2013-07-19). Retrieved on 2013-09-23.   sorcerer (fantasy)|sorcerers, magician (fantasy)|magicians, and legendary places, which are often intermingled with real people and geography, not always rationally. Common protagonists include the historical Abbasid Caliphate|Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid, his Grand Vizier, Ja'far ibn Yahya|Jafar al-Barmaki, and the famous poet Abu Nuwas, despite the fact that these figures lived some 200 years after the fall of the Sassanid Empire, in which the frame tale of Scheherazade is set. Sometimes a character in Scheherazade's tale will begin telling other characters a story of his own, and that story may have another one told within it, resulting in a richly layered narrative texture. 
 
 Different versions differ, at least in detail, as to final endings (in some Scheherazade asks for a pardon, in some the king sees their children and decides not to execute his wife, in some other things happen that make the king distracted) but they all end with the king giving his wife a pardon and sparing her life. 
 
 The narrator's standards for what constitutes a cliffhanger seem broader than in modern literature. While in many cases a story is cut off with the hero in danger of losing their life or another kind of deep trouble, in some parts of the full text Scheherazade stops her narration in the middle of an exposition of abstract philosophical principles or complex points of Islamic philosophy, and in one case during a detailed description of Medicine in medieval Islam#Human anatomy and physiology|human anatomy according to Galen—and in all of these cases she turns out to be justified in her belief that the king's curiosity about the sequel would buy her another day of life. 
 
 ==History: versions and translations== 
 The history of the ''Nights'' is extremely complex and modern scholars have made many attempts to untangle the story of how the collection as it currently exists came about. Robert Irwin (writer)|Robert Irwin summarises their findings: 
 
  
 
 ===Possible Indian influence=== 
 Devices found in Sanskrit literature such as frame stories and animal fables are seen by some scholars as lying at the root of the conception of the ''Nights''.  Reynolds p. 271   The motif of the wise young woman who delays and finally removes an impending danger by telling stories has been traced back to Indian sources.   Indian folklore is represented in the ''Nights'' by certain animal stories, which reflect influence from ancient Sanskrit literature|Sanskrit fables. The influence of the ''Panchatantra'' and ''Baital Pachisi'' is particularly notable.  Burton, Richard F. (2002). ''Vikram and the Vampire Or Tales of Hindu Devilry'' p. xi. Adamant Media Corporation   ''Jataka tales|The Jataka Tales'' are a collection of 547 Buddhist texts|Buddhist stories, which are for the most part moral stories with an ethical purpose. ''The Tale of the Bull and the Ass'' and the linked ''Tale of the Merchant and his Wife'' are found in the frame stories of both the ''Jataka'' and the ''Nights''.    
 
 It is possible that the influence of the ''Panchatantra'' is via a Sanskrit adaptation called the ''Tantropakhyana''. Only fragments of the original Sanskrit form of this work survive, but translations or adaptations exist in Tamil,  Artola. ''Pancatantra'' Manuscripts from South India in the ''Adyar Library Bulletin''. 1957. pp. 45ff.   Lao,  K. Raksamani. ''The Nandakaprakarana attributed to Vasubhaga, a Comparative Study''. University of Toronto Thesis. 1978. pp. 221ff.   Thai,  E. Lorgeou. ''Les entretiensde Nang Tantrai''. Paris. 1924.   and Old Javanese.  C. Hooykaas. Bibliotheca Javaneca No. 2. Bandoeng. 1931.   The frame story is particularly interesting, as it follows the broad outline of a concubine telling stories in order to maintain the interest and favour of a king—although the basis of the collection of stories is from the ''Panchatantra''—with its original Indian setting.  A. K. Warder. ''Indian Kāvya Literature: The art of storytelling, Volume VI''. Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. 1992. pp. 61–62, 76–82.  
 
 The ''Panchatantra'' and various tales from ''Jatakas'' were first translated into Persian by Borzūya in 570 CE,  [ IIS.ac.uk Dr Fahmida Suleman,  " Kalila wa Dimna " ], in ''Medieval Islamic Civilization, An Encyclopaedia'', Vol. II, pp. 432–33, ed. Josef W. Meri, New York-London: Routledge, 2006   they were later translated into Arabic by Ibn al-Muqaffa'|Ibn al-Muqaffa in 750 CE.  ''The Fables of Kalila and Dimnah'', translated from the Arabic by Saleh Sa'adeh Jallad, 2002. Melisende, London,    The Arabic version was translated into several languages, including Syriac, Greek, Hebrew and Spanish.  Kalilah and Dimnah; or, The fables of Bidpai; being an account of their literary history, [ p. xiv]  
 
 ===Persian prototype: ''Hezār Afsān''=== 
 File:Kelileh va Demneh.jpg|thumb|right|A page from Kelileh va Demneh dated 1429, from Herat, a Persian version of the Panchatantra – depicts the manipulative jackal-vizier, Dimna, trying to lead his lion-king into war. 
 The earliest mentions of the ''Nights'' refer to it as an Arabic translation from a Persian book, ''Hezār Afsān'' (aka ''Afsaneh'' or ''Afsana''), meaning 'The Thousand Stories'. In the 10th century Ibn al-Nadim compiled a catalogue of books (the  " Fihrist " ) in Baghdad. He noted that the Sassanid dynasty|Sassanid kings of Iran enjoyed  " evening tales and fables " .  Pinault p. 1   Al-Nadim then writes about the Persian ''Hezār Afsān'', explaining the frame story it employs: a bloodthirsty king kills off a succession of wives after their wedding night. Eventually one has the intelligence to save herself by telling him a story every evening, leaving each tale unfinished until the next night so that the king will delay her execution.  Pinault p. 4    
 
 However, according to al-Nadim, the book contains only 200 stories. He also writes disparagingly of the collection's literary quality, observing that  " it is truly a coarse book, without warmth in the telling " .  Irwin pp. 49–50   In the same century Al-Masudi also refers to the ''Hezār Afsān'', saying the Arabic translation is called ''Alf Khurafa'' ('A Thousand Entertaining Tales') but is generally known as ''Alf Layla'' ('A Thousand Nights'). He mentions the characters Shirāzd (Scheherazade) and Dināzād.  Irwin p. 49  
 
 No physical evidence of the ''Hezār Afsān'' has survived,   so its exact relationship with the existing later Arabic versions remains a mystery.  Irwin p. 51:  " It seems probable from all the above [...] that the Persian ''Hezār Afsaneh'' was translated into Arabic in the eighth or early 9th century and was given the title ''Alf Khurafa'' before being subsequently retitled ''Alf Layla''. However, it remains far from clear what the connection is between this fragment of the early text and the ''Nights'' stories as they have survived in later and fuller manuscripts; nor how the Syrian manuscripts related to later Egyptian versions. "   Apart from the Scheherazade frame story, several other tales have Persian origins, although it is unclear how they entered the collection.  Eva Sallis ''Scheherazade Through the Looking-Glass: The Metamorphosis of the Thousand and One Nights'' (Routledge, 1999), p. 2 and note 6   These stories include the cycle of  " King Jali'ad and his Wazir Shimas "  and  " The Ten Wazirs or the History of King Azadbakht and his Son "  (derived from the 7th-century Persian ''Bakhtiyārnāma'').  Irwin p. 76  
 
 In the 1950s, the Iraqi people|Iraqi scholar Safa Khulusi suggested (on internal rather than historical evidence) that the Persian writer Ibn al-Muqaffa' was responsible for the first Arabic translation of the frame story and some of the Persian stories later incorporated into the Nights. This would place genesis of the collection in the 8th century.  Safa Khulusi, ''Studies in Comparative Literature and Western Literary Schools,'' Chapter: ''Qisas Alf Laylah wa Laylah'' (''One thousand and one Nights''), pp. 15–85. Al-Rabita Press, Baghdad, 1957.   Safa Khulusi, The Influence of Ibn al-Muqaffa' on The Arabian Nights. ''Islamic Review'', Dec 1960, pp. 29–31  
 
 ===Evolving Arabic versions=== 
 File:Princess Parizade Bringing Home the Singing Tree.jpg|thumb|The story of ''Princess Parizade'' and the ''Magic Tree'' by Maxfield Parrish, 1906  [ & pg=PA543 & dq=princess+parizade#v=onepage & q=princess%20parizade & f=false The Thousand and One Nights; Or, The Arabian Night's Entertainments – David Claypoole Johnston – Google Books]. Books.google.com.pk. Retrieved on 2013-09-23.   
 
 In the mid-20th century, the scholar Nabia Abbott found a document with a few lines of an Arabic work with the title ''The Book of the Tale of a Thousand Nights'', dating from the 9th century. This is the earliest known surviving fragment of the ''Nights''.  Irwin p. 51   The first reference to the Arabic version under its full title ''The One Thousand and One Nights'' appears in Cairo in the 12th century.  Irwin p. 50   Professor Dwight Reynolds describes the subsequent transformations of the Arabic version: 
 
  
 
 Two main Arabic manuscript traditions of the Nights are known: the Syrian and the Egyptian. The Syrian tradition is primarily represented by the earliest extensive manuscript of the ''Nights'', a fourteenth- or fifteenth-century Syrian manuscript now known as the Galland Manuscript. It and surviving copies of it are much shorter and include fewer tales than the Egyptian tradition. It is represented in print by the so-called ''Calcutta I'' (1814–1818) and most notably by the 'Leiden edition' (1984).  Beaumont, Daniel. Literary Style and Narrative Technique in the Arabian Nights. p. 1. In The Arabian nights encyclopedia, Volume 1   Irwin, Robert. 2004. The Arabian nights: a companion. p. 55   The Leiden Edition, prepared by Muhsin Mahdi, is the only critical edition of 1001 Nights to date,     believed to be most stylistically faithful representation of mediaeval Arabic versions currently available.   
 
 Texts of the Egyptian tradition emerge later and contain many more tales of much more varied content; a much larger number of originally independent tales have been incorporated into the collection over the centuries, most of them after the Galland manuscript was written,  Eva Sallis|Sallis, Eva. 1999. Sheherazade through the looking glass: the metamorphosis of the Thousand and One Nights. pp. 18–43   and were being included as late as in the 18th and 19th centuries, perhaps in order to attain the eponymous number of 1001 nights. 
 
 All extant substantial versions of both recensions share a small common core of tales:    
 
 * The Merchant and the Genie 
 * The Fisherman and the Jinni|The Fisherman and the Genie 
 * The Porter and the Three Ladies 
 * The Three Apples 
 * s:Tale of Núr al-Dín Alí and His Son Badr al-Dín Hasan|Nur al-Din Ali and Shams al-Din (and Badr al-Din Hasan) 
 * The Hunchback cycle 
 * Nur al-Din Ali and Anis al-Jalis 
 * Ali Ibn Bakkar and Shams al-Nahar 
 
 The texts of the Syrian recension do not contain much beside that core. It is debated which of the Arabic recensions is more  " authentic "  and closer to the original: the Egyptian ones have been modified more extensively and more recently, and scholars such as Muhsin Mahdi have suspected that this was caused in part by European demand for a  " complete version " ; but it appears that this type of modification has been common throughout the history of the collection, and independent tales have always been added to it.   Pinault, David. Story-telling techniques in the Arabian nights. pp. 1–12. Also in Encyclopedia of Arabic Literature, v. 1  
 
 === Printed Arabic editions === 
 The first printed Arabic-language edition of the ''One Thousand and One Nights'' was published in 1775. It contained an Egyptian version of ''The Nights'' known as  " ZER "  (Hermann Zotenberg|Zotenberg's Egyptian Recension) and 200 tales. No copy of this edition survives, but it was the basis for an 1835 edition by Bulaq, published by the Egyptian government. 
 File:Arabic manuscript with parts of Arabian Nights, collected by scholar and traveler Heinrich Friedrich von Diez, 19th century CE.jpg|thumb|Arabic manuscript with parts of Arabian Nights, collected by Heinrich Friedrich von Diez, 19th century CE, origin unknown 
 The ''Nights'' were next printed in Arabic in two volumes in Calcutta by the British East India Company in 1814–18. Each volume contained one hundred tales. 
 
 Soon after, the Prussian scholar Christian Habicht (historian)|Christian Maximilian Habicht collaborated with the Tunisian Mordecai ibn al-Najjar to create an edition containing 1001 nights both in the original Arabic and in German translation, initially in a series of eight volumes published in Wrocław|Breslau in 1825–1838. A further four volumes followed in 1842–1843. In addition to the Galland manuscript, Habicht and al-Najjar used what they believed to be a Tunisian manuscript, which was later revealed as a forgery by al-Najjar.  
 
 Both the ZER printing and Habicht and al-Najjar's edition influenced the next printing, a four-volume edition also from Calcutta (known as the ''Macnaghten'' or ''Calcutta II'' edition). This claimed to be based on an older Egyptian manuscript (which has never been found). 
 
 A major recent edition, which reverts to the Syrian recension, is a critical edition based on the fourteenth- or fifteenth-century Syrian manuscript in the Bibliothèque Nationale originally used by Galland.     This edition, known as the Leiden text, was compiled in Arabic by Muhsin Mahdi (1984–1994).  ''The Thousand and One Nights (Alf layla wa-layla), from the Earliest Known Sources'', ed. by Muhsin Mahdi, 3 vols (Leiden: Brill, 1984–1994), .   Mahdi argued that this version is the earliest extant one (a view that is largely accepted today) and that it reflects most closely a  " definitive "  coherent text ancestral to all others that he believed to have existed during the Mamluk period (a view that remains contentious).   Madeleine Dobie, 2009. Translation in the contact zone: Antoine Galland's Mille et une nuits: contes arabes. p. 37. In Saree Makdisi|Makdisi, Saree and Felicity Nussbaum (eds.):  " The Arabian Nights in Historical Context: Between East and West "   Irwin, Robert. 2004. The Arabian nights: a companion. pp. 1–9   Still, even scholars who deny this version the exclusive status of  " the only ''real'' Arabian Nights "  recognize it as being the best source on the original ''style'' and linguistic form of the mediaeval work.   
 
 In 1997, a further Arabic edition appeared, containing tales from the Arabian Nights transcribed from a seventeenth-century manuscript in the Egyptian dialect of Arabic.  ''Alf laylah wa-laylah: bi-al-ʻāmmīyah al-Miṣrīyah: layālī al-ḥubb wa-al-ʻishq'', ed. by Hishām ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz and ʻĀdil ʻAbd al-Ḥamīd (Cairo: Dār al-Khayyāl, 1997), .  
 
 ===Modern translations=== 
  
 File:William-Strang-Sindbad-AliBaba-titlepage.JPG|thumb|''Sindbad the sailor and Ali Baba and the forty thieves'' by William Strang, 1896 
 The first European version (1704–1717) was translated into French language|French by Antoine Galland from an Arabic text of the Syrian recension and other sources. This 12-volume work, ''Les mille et une nuits|Les Mille et une nuits, contes arabes traduits en français'' ('The Thousand and one nights, Arab stories translated into French'), included stories that were not in the original Arabic manuscript.  " Aladdin's lamp|Aladdin's Lamp " , and  " Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves "  (as well as several other lesser-known tales) appeared first in Galland's translation and cannot be found in any of the original manuscripts. He wrote that he heard them from the Christian Maronite storyteller Hanna Diyab|Hanna Diab during Diab's visit to Paris. Galland's version of the ''Nights'' was immensely popular throughout Europe, and later versions were issued by Galland's publisher using Galland's name without his consent. 
 
 As scholars were looking for the presumed  " complete "  and  " original "  form of the Nights, they naturally turned to the more voluminous texts of the Egyptian recension, which soon came to be viewed as the  " standard version " . The first translations of this kind, such as that of Edward William Lane|Edward Lane (1840, 1859), were bowdlerized. Unabridged and unexpurgated translations were made, first by John Payne (poet)|John Payne, under the title ''The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night'' (1882, nine volumes), and then by Sir Richard Francis Burton, entitled ''The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night'' (1885, ten volumes) & nbsp;– the latter was, according to some assessments, partially based on the former, leading to charges of plagiarism.   Marzolph, Ulrich and Richard van Leeuwen. 2004. The Arabian nights encyclopedia, Volume 1. pp. 506–08    
 
 In view of the Human sexuality|sexual imagery in the source texts (which Burton emphasized even further, especially by adding extensive footnotes and appendices on Oriental sexual mores  ) and the strict Victorian morality|Victorian laws on obscene material, both of these translations were printed as private editions for subscribers only, rather than published in the usual manner. Burton's original 10 volumes were followed by a further six (seven in the Baghdad Edition and perhaps others) entitled ''The Supplemental Nights to the Thousand Nights and a Night'', which were printed between 1886 and 1888.  It has, however, been criticized for its  " archaic language and extravagant idiom "  and  " obsessive focus on sexuality "  (and has even been called an  " eccentric wikt:ego-trip|ego-trip "  and a  " highly personal reworking of the text " ).  
 
 Later versions of the ''Nights'' include that of the French people|French doctor J. C. Mardrus, issued from 1898 to 1904. It was translated into English by Powys Mathers, and issued in 1923. Like Payne's and Burton's texts, it is based on the Egyptian recension and retains the erotic material, indeed expanding on it, but it has been criticized for inaccuracy.  Sallis, Eva. 1999. Sheherazade through the looking glass: the metamorphosis of the Thousand and One Nights. pp. 4 ''passim''  
 
 Muhsin Mahdi's 1984 Leiden edition, based on the Galland Manuscript, was rendered into English by Husain Haddawy (1990).  ''The Arabian Nights'', trans. by Husain Haddawy (New York: Norton, 1990).   This translation has been praised as  " very readable "  and  " strongly recommended for anyone who wishes to taste the authentic flavour of those tales. "   An additional second volume of ''Arabian nights'' translated by Haddawy, composed of popular tales ''not'' present in the Leiden edition, was published in 1995.  ''The Arabian Nights II: Sindbad and Other Popular Stories'', trans. by Husain Haddawy (New York: Norton, 1995).   Both volumes were the basis for a single-volume reprint of selected tales of Haddawy's translations.  ''The Arabian Nights: The Husain Haddawy Translation Based on the Text Edited by Muhsin Mahdi, Contexts, Criticism'', ed. by Daniel Heller-Roazen (New York: Norton, 2010).  
 
 In 2008 a new English translation was published by Penguin Classics in three volumes. It is translated by Malcolm C. Lyons and Ursula Lyons with introduction and annotations by Robert Irwin. This is the first complete translation of the Macnaghten or Calcutta II edition (Egyptian recension) since Burton's. It contains, in addition to the standard text of 1001 Nights, the so-called  " orphan stories "  of ''Aladdin'' and ''Ali Baba'' as well as an alternative ending to ''The seventh journey of Sindbad'' from Antoine Galland's original French. As the translator himself notes in his preface to the three volumes,  " [N]o attempt has been made to superimpose on the translation changes that would be needed to 'rectify' ... accretions, ... repetitions, non sequiturs and confusions that mark the present text, "  and the work is a  " representation of what is primarily oral literature, appealing to the ear rather than the eye. "  [ PEN American Center]. Pen.org. Retrieved on 2013-09-23.   The Lyons translation includes all the poetry (in plain prose paraphrase) but does not attempt to reproduce in English the internal rhyming of some prose sections of the original Arabic. Moreover, it streamlines somewhat and has cuts. In this sense it is not, as claimed, a complete translation. 
 
 ===Timeline=== 
 File:Arabian nights manuscript.jpg|thumb|right|Arabic manuscript of ''The Thousand and One Nights'' dating back to the 14th century 
 Scholars have assembled a timeline concerning the publication history of ''The Nights'':  Dwight Reynolds.  " The Thousand and One Nights: A History of the Text and its Reception. "  ''The Cambridge History of Arabic Literature: Arabic Literature in the Post-Classical Period''. Cambridge UP, 2006.      " The Oriental Tale in England in the Eighteenth Century " , by Martha Pike Conant, Ph.D. Columbia University Press (1908)  
 * One of the oldest Arabic manuscript fragments from Syria (a few handwritten pages) dating to the early 9th century. Discovered by scholar Nabia Abbott in 1948, it bears the title ''Kitab Hadith Alf Layla'' ( " The Book of the Tale of the Thousand Nights " ) and the first few lines of the book in which Dinazad asks Shirazad (Scheherazade) to tell her stories.  
 * 10th century: Mention of ''Hezār Afsān'' in Ibn al-Nadim's  " Fihrist "  (Catalogue of books) in Baghdad. He attributes a pre-Islamic Sassanid dynasty|Sassanian Persian origin to the collection and refers to the frame story of Scheherazade telling stories over a thousand nights to save her life.  
 * 10th century: Reference to ''The Thousand Nights'', an Arabic translation of the Persian ''Hezār Afsān'' ( " Thousand Stories " ),  in ''Muruj Al-Dhahab'' (The Meadows of Gold) by Al-Mas'udi.  
 * 12th century: A document from Cairo refers to a Jewish bookseller lending a copy of ''The Thousand and One Nights'' (this is the first appearance of the final form of the title).  
 * 14th century: Existing Syrian manuscript in the Bibliothèque nationale de France in Paris (contains about 300 tales).  
 * 1704: Antoine Galland's French translation is the first European version of ''The Nights''. Later volumes were introduced using Galland's name though the stories were written by unknown persons at the behest of the publisher wanting to capitalize on the popularity of the collection. 
 * c. 1706 – c. 1721: An anonymously translated version in English appears in Europe dubbed the 12-volume  " Grub Street "  version. This is entitled ''Arabian Nights' Entertainments''—the first known use of the common English title of the work.    
 * 1768: first Polish language|Polish translation, 12 volumes. Based, as many European on the French language|French translation. 
 * 1775: Egyptian version of ''The Nights'' called  " ZER "  (Hermann Zotenberg's Egyptian Recension) with 200 tales (no surviving edition exists). 
 * 1804–1806, 1825: The Austrian polyglot and orientalist Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall (1774–1856) translates a subsequently lost manuscript into French between 1804 and 1806. His French translation, which was partially abridged and included Galland's  " orphan stories " ,  has been lost, but its translation into German that was published in 1825 still survives.    
 * 1814: Calcutta I, the earliest existing Arabic printed version, is published by the British East India Company. A second volume was released in 1818. Both had 100 tales each. 
 * 1811: Jonathan Scott (1754–1829), an Englishman who learned Arabic and Persian in India, produces an English translation, mostly based on Galland's French version, supplemented by other sources.  Robert Irwin calls it the  " first literary translation into English " , in contrast to earlier translations from French by   " Grub Street hacks " .    
 * Early 19th century: Modern Persian translations of the text are made, variously under the title ''Alf leile va leile'',   ''Hezār-o yek šhab'' (), or, in distorted Arabic, ''Alf al-leil''. One early extant version is that illustrated by Sani ol Molk (1814–1866)  for Mohammad Shah Qajar.  
 Ulrich Marzolph, ''The Arabian nights in transnational perspective'', 2007, , [ & pg=PA230#v=onepage & q & f=false p. 230].  
 * 1825–1838: The Breslau/Habicht edition is published in Arabic in 8 volumes. Christian Maximilian Habicht (born in Breslau, Kingdom of Prussia, 1775) collaborated with the Tunisian Mordecai ibn al-Najjar to create this edition containing 1001 nights. In addition to the Galland manuscript, they used what they believed to be a Tunisian manuscript, which was later revealed as a forgery by al-Najjar.   Using versions of ''The Nights'', tales from Al-Najjar, and other stories from unknown origins Habicht published his version in Arabic and German language|German. 
 * 1842–1843: Four additional volumes by Habicht. 
 * 1835: Bulaq version: These two volumes, printed by the Egyptian government, are the oldest printed (by a publishing house) version of ''The Nights'' in Arabic by a non-European. It is primarily a reprinting of the ZER text. 
 * 1839–1842: Calcutta II (4 volumes) is published. It claims to be based on an older Egyptian manuscript (which was never found). This version contains many elements and stories from the Habicht edition. 
 * 1838: Torrens version in English. 
 * 1838–1840: Edward William Lane publishes an English translation. Notable for its exclusion of content Lane found immoral and for its anthropology|anthropological notes on Arab customs by Lane. 
 * 1882–1884: John Payne (poet)|John Payne publishes an English version translated entirely from Calcutta II, adding some tales from Calcutta I and Breslau. 
 * 1885–1888: Richard Francis Burton|Sir Richard Francis Burton publishes The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night|an English translation from several sources (largely the same as Payne  ). His version accentuated the sexuality of the stories ''vis-à-vis'' Lane's bowdlerized translation. 
 * 1889–1904: J. C. Mardrus publishes a French version using Bulaq and Calcutta II editions. 
 * 1973: First Polish language|Polish translation based on the original language edition, but compressed 12 volumes to 9, by Państwowy Instytut Wydawniczy|PIW. 
 * 1984: Muhsin Mahdi publishes an Arabic edition based on the oldest Arabic manuscript surviving (based on the oldest surviving Syrian manuscript currently held in the Bibliothèque Nationale). 
 * 1986–1987: French translation by Arabist René R. Khawam 
 * 1990: Husain Haddawy publishes an English translation of Mahdi. 
 * 2008: New Penguin Classics translation (in three volumes) by Malcolm C. Lyons and Ursula Lyons of the Calcutta II edition 
 
 ==Literary themes and techniques== 
 File:Thousand_and_One_Nights_21.jpg|thumb|Illustration of ''One Thousand and One Nights'' by Sani ol Molk, Iran, 1853 
 
 The ''One Thousand and One Nights'' and various tales within it make use of many innovative literary techniques, which the storytellers of the tales rely on for increased drama, suspense, or other emotions.   Some of these date back to earlier Persian literature|Persian, Indian literature|Indian and Arabic literature, while others were original to the ''One Thousand and One Nights''. 
 
 ===Frame story=== 
 The ''One Thousand and One Nights'' employs an early example of the frame story, or framing device: the character Scheherazade narrates a set of tales (most often fairy tales) to the Sultan Shahrayar|Shahriyar over many nights. Many of Scheherazade's tales are themselves frame stories, such as the ''Sinbad the Sailor|Tale of Sinbad the Seaman and Sinbad the Landsman'', which is a collection of adventures related by Sinbad the Seaman to Sinbad the Landsman. 
 
 ===Embedded narrative=== 
 Another technique featured in the ''One Thousand and One Nights'' is an early example of the  " story within a story " , or ''embedded narrative'' technique: this can be traced back to earlier Persian and Indian storytelling traditions, most notably the ''Panchatantra'' of ancient Sanskrit literature. The ''Nights'', however, improved on the ''Panchatantra'' in several ways, particularly in the way a story is introduced. In the ''Panchatantra'', stories are introduced as Didacticism|didactic analogies, with the frame story referring to these stories with variants of the phrase  " If you're not careful, that which happened to the louse and the flea will happen to you. "  In the ''Nights'', this didactic framework is the least common way of introducing the story: instead, a story is most commonly introduced through subtle means, particularly as an answer to questions raised in a previous tale.    
 
 The general story is narrated by an unknown narrator, and in this narration the stories are told by Scheherazade. In most of Scheherazade's narrations there are also stories narrated, and even in some of these, there are some other stories.     This is particularly the case for the  " Sinbad the Sailor "  story narrated by Scheherazade in the ''One Thousand and One Nights''. Within the  " Sinbad the Sailor "  story itself, the protagonist Sinbad the Sailor narrates the stories of his seven voyages to Sinbad the Porter. The device is also used to great effect in stories such as  " The Three Apples "  and  " #Unreliable narrator|The Seven Viziers " . In yet another tale Scheherazade narrates,  " The Fisherman and the Jinni " , the  " Tale of the Wazir and the Sage List of One Thousand and One Nights characters#Duban|Duban "  is narrated within it, and within that there are three more tales narrated. 
 
 ===Dramatic visualization=== 
 Dramatic visualization is  " the representing of an object or character with an abundance of descriptive detail, or the mimetic rendering of gestures and dialogue in such a way as to make a given scene 'visual' or imaginatively present to an audience " . This technique is used in several tales of the ''One Thousand and One Nights'';   an example of this is the tale of  " The Three Apples "  (see #Crime fiction elements|Crime fiction elements below). 
 
 ===Fate and destiny=== 
 A common Theme (literature)|theme in many ''Arabian Nights'' tales is wikt:fate|fate and destiny. Italian filmmaker Pier Paolo Pasolini observed:    
 
  
 
 Though invisible, fate may be considered a leading character in the ''One Thousand and One Nights''.     The plot devices often used to present this theme are coincidence,     Retrocausality|reverse causation, and the self-fulfilling prophecy (see Foreshadowing section below).  
 
 ===Foreshadowing=== 
 File:The Valley of Diamonds by Maxfield Parrish.jpg|thumb|Sinbad|Sindbad and the Valley of Diamonds, from the Second Voyage. 
 
 Early examples of the foreshadowing technique of repetitive designation, now known as  " Chekhov's gun " , occur in the ''One Thousand and One Nights'', which contains  " repeated references to some character or object which appears insignificant when first mentioned but which reappears later to intrude suddenly in the narrative. "     A notable example is in the tale of  " The Three Apples "  (see #Crime fiction elements|Crime fiction elements below). 
 
 Another early foreshadowing technique is ''formal patterning'',  " the organization of the events, actions and gestures which constitute a narrative and give shape to a story; when done well, formal patterning allows the audience the pleasure of discerning and anticipating the structure of the plot as it unfolds. "  This technique is also found in ''One Thousand and One Nights''.  
 
 ==== The self-fulfilling prophecy ==== 
 Several tales in the ''One Thousand and One Nights'' use the self-fulfilling prophecy, as a special form of literary prolepsis, to foreshadow what is going to happen. This literary device dates back to the story of Krishna in ancient Sanskrit literature, and Oedipus or the death of Heracles in the plays of Sophocles. A variation of this device is the self-fulfilling dream, which can be found in Arabic literature (or the dreams of Joseph (Genesis)|Joseph and his conflicts with his brothers, in the Book of Genesis|Hebrew Bible). 
 
 A notable example is  " The Ruined Man who Became Rich Again through a Dream " , in which a man is told in his dream to leave his native city of Baghdad and travel to Cairo, where he will discover the whereabouts of some hidden treasure. The man travels there and experiences misfortune, ending up in jail, where he tells his dream to a police officer. The officer mocks the idea of foreboding dreams and tells the protagonist that he himself had a dream about a house with a courtyard and fountain in Baghdad where treasure is buried under the fountain. The man recognizes the place as his own house and, after he is released from jail, he returns home and digs up the treasure. In other words, the foreboding dream not only predicted the future, but the dream was the cause of its prediction coming true. A variant of this story later appears in English folklore as the  " Pedlar of Swaffham "  and Paulo Coelho's  " The Alchemist (novel)|The Alchemist " ; Jorge Luis Borges' collection of short stories ''A Universal History of Infamy'' featured his translation of this particular story into Spanish, as  " The Story Of The Two Dreamers. "    
 
 " The Tale of Attaf "  depicts another variation of the self-fulfilling prophecy, whereby Harun al-Rashid consults his library (the House of Wisdom), reads a random book,  " falls to laughing and weeping and dismisses the faithful vizier Ja'far ibn Yahya from sight. Ja'afar, disturbed and upset flees Baghdad and plunges into a series of adventures in Damascus, involving Attaf and the woman whom Attaf eventually marries. "  After returning to Baghdad, Ja'afar reads the same book that caused Harun to laugh and weep, and discovers that it describes his own adventures with Attaf. In other words, it was Harun's reading of the book that provoked the adventures described in the book to take place. This is an early example of Retrocausality|reverse causation.      
 
 Near the end of the tale, Attaf is given a death sentence for a crime he did not commit but Harun, knowing the truth from what he has read in the book, prevents this and has Attaf released from prison. In the 12th century, this tale was Latin translations of the 12th century|translated into Latin by Petrus Alphonsi and included in his ''Disciplina Clericalis'',     alongside the  " Seven Wise Masters|Sindibad "  story cycle.     In the 14th century, a version of  " The Tale of Attaf "  also appears in the ''Gesta Romanorum'' and Giovanni Boccaccio's ''The Decameron''.  
 
 ===Repetition=== 
 File:One_Thousand_and_One_Nights26.jpg|thumb|Illustration of ''One Thousand and One Nights'' by Sani ol molk, Iran, 1849–1856 
 
 ''Leitwortstil'' is  " the purposeful Repetition (rhetorical device)|repetition of words "  in a given literary piece that  " usually expresses a Motif (narrative)|motif or Theme (literature)|theme important to the given story. "  This device occurs in the ''One Thousand and One Nights'', which binds several tales in a story cycle. The storytellers of the tales relied on this technique  " to shape the constituent members of their story cycles into a coherent whole. "    
 
 Another technique used in the ''One Thousand and One Nights'' is thematic patterning, which is:  [T]he distribution of recurrent thematic concepts and moralistic Motif (literature)|motifs among the various incidents and frames of a story. In a skillfully crafted tale, thematic patterning may be arranged so as to emphasize the unifying argument or salient idea which disparate events and disparate frames have in common.     Several different variants of the  " Cinderella "  story, which has its origins in the Egyptian story of Rhodopis, appear in the ''One Thousand and One Nights'', including  " The Second Shaykh's Story " ,  " The Eldest Lady's Tale "  and  " Abdallah ibn Fadil and His Brothers " , all dealing with the theme of a younger sibling harassed by two jealous elders. In some of these, the siblings are female, while in others they are male. One of the tales,  " Judar and His Brethren " , departs from the happy endings of previous variants and reworks the plot to give it a Tragedy|tragic ending instead, with the younger brother being poisoned by his elder brothers.    
 
 ===Sexual humour=== 
 The ''Nights'' contain many examples of sexual humour. Some of this borders on satire, as in the tale called  " Ali with the Large Member "  which pokes fun at obsession with human penis size|penis size.     " Ali with the Large Member "  is only in the Wortley Montague manuscript (1764), which is in the Bodleian Library, and is not found in Burton or any of the other standard translations. (Ref: ''Arabian Nights Encyclopedia'').  
 
 ===Unreliable narrator=== 
 The literary device of the unreliable narrator was used in several fictional medieval Arabic literature|Arabic tales of the ''One Thousand and One Nights''. In one tale,  " The Seven Viziers "  (also known as  " Craft and Malice of Women or The Tale of the King, His Son, His Concubine and the Seven Wazirs " ), a courtesan accuses a king's son of having assaulted her, when in reality she had failed to seduce him (inspired by the Qur'anic/Bible|Biblical story of Islamic view of Joseph|Yusuf/Joseph (Hebrew Bible)|Joseph). Seven viziers attempt to save his life by narrating seven stories to prove the unreliability of women, and the courtesan responds by narrating a story to prove the unreliability of viziers.     The unreliable narrator device is also used to generate suspense in  " The Three Apples "  and humor in  " The Hunchback's Tale "  (see #Crime fiction elements|Crime fiction elements below). 
 
 === Genre elements === 
  
 ====Crime fiction==== 
 File:Godefroy Durand - Morgiane.jpg|thumb|Illustration depicting Morgiana (character)|Morgiana and the thieves from ''Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves''. 
 An example of the Crime fiction|murder mystery     and Thriller (genre)|suspense thriller genres in the collection, with multiple plot twists     and detective fiction elements     was  " The Three Apples " , also known as ''Hikayat al-sabiyya 'l-maqtula'' ('The Tale of the Murdered Young Woman').    
 
 In this tale, Harun al-Rashid comes to possess a chest, which, when opened, contains the body of a young woman. Harun gives his vizier, Ja'far ibn Yahya|Ja'far, three days to find the culprit or be executed. At the end of three days, when Ja'far is about to be executed for his failure, two men come forward, both claiming to be the murderer. As they tell their story it transpires that, although the younger of them, the woman's husband, was responsible for her death, some of the blame attaches to a slave, who had taken one of the apples mentioned in the title and caused the woman's murder. 
 
 Harun then gives Ja'far three more days to find the guilty slave. When he yet again fails to find the culprit, and bids his family goodbye before his execution, he discovers by chance his daughter has the apple, which she obtained from Ja'far's own slave, Rayhan. Thus the mystery is solved. 
 
 Another ''Nights'' tale with crime fiction elements was  " The Hunchback's Tale "  story cycle which, unlike  " The Three Apples " , was more of a suspenseful comedy and Legal drama|courtroom drama rather than a murder mystery or detective fiction. The story is set in a fictional China and begins with a hunchback, the emperor's favourite comedian, being invited to dinner by a tailor couple. The hunchback accidentally chokes on his food from laughing too hard and the couple, fearful that the emperor will be furious, take his body to a Medicine in medieval Islam|Jewish doctor's Bimaristan|clinic and leave him there. This leads to the next tale in the cycle, the  " Tale of the Jewish Doctor " , where the doctor accidentally trips over the hunchback's body, falls down the stairs with him, and finds him dead, leading him to believe that the fall had killed him. The doctor then dumps his body down a chimney, and this leads to yet another tale in the cycle, which continues with twelve tales in total, leading to all the people involved in this incident finding themselves in a courtroom, all making Unreliable narrator|different claims over how the hunchback had died.     Crime fiction elements are also present near the end of  " The Tale of Attaf "  (see #Foreshadowing|Foreshadowing above). 
 
  
 ==== Horror fiction ==== 
 Haunting is used as a plot device in gothic fiction and horror fiction, as well as modern paranormal fiction. Legends about haunted houses have long appeared in literature. In particular, the ''Arabian Nights'' tale of  " Ali the Cairene and the Haunted House in Baghdad "  revolves around a house haunted by Genie|jinn.     The ''Nights'' is almost certainly the earliest surviving literature that mentions ghouls, and many of the stories in that collection involve or reference ghouls. A prime example is the story ''The History of Gherib and His Brother Agib'' (from ''Nights'' vol. 6), in which Gherib, an outcast prince, fights off a family of ravenous Ghouls and then enslaves them and converts them to Islam.    
 
 Horror fiction elements are also found in  " The City of Brass "  tale, which revolves around a ghost town.   The hero of the tale is an historical person, Musa bin Nusayr.  
 
 The horrific nature of Scheherazade's situation is magnified in Stephen King's ''Misery (novel)|Misery'', in which the protagonist is forced to write a novel to keep his captor from torturing and killing him. The influence of the ''Nights'' on modern horror fiction is certainly discernible in the work of H. P. Lovecraft. As a child, he was fascinated by the adventures recounted in the book, and he attributes some of his creations to his love of the ''1001 Nights''.    
 
  
 ==== Fantasy and science fiction ==== 
 File:More tales from the Arabian nights-14566176968.jpg|thumb|An illustration of the ''story of Prince Ahmed and the Fairy Paribanou'', ''More tales from the Arabian nights'' by Willy Pogany (1915) 
 
 Several stories within the ''One Thousand and One Nights'' feature early science fiction elements. One example is  " The Adventures of Bulukiya " , where the protagonist Bulukiya's quest for the Elixir of life|herb of immortality leads him to explore the seas, journey to Paradise and to Hell, and travel across the cosmos to different worlds much larger than his own world, anticipating elements of Galaxy|galactic science fiction;     along the way, he encounters societies of djinn|jinn,     mermaids, talking Serpent (symbolism)|serpents, talking trees, and other forms of life.   In  " Abu al-Husn and His Slave-Girl Tawaddud " , the heroine Tawaddud gives an impromptu lecture on the mansions of the Moon, and the benevolent and sinister aspects of the planets.    
 
 In another ''1001 Nights'' tale,  " Abdullah the Fisherman and Abdullah the Merman " , the protagonist Abdullah the Fisherman gains the ability to breathe underwater and discovers an underwater society that is portrayed as an inverted reflection of society on land, in that the underwater society follows a form of primitive communism where concepts like money and clothing do not exist. Other ''Arabian Nights'' tales also depict Amazons|Amazon societies dominated by women, lost ancient technologies, advanced ancient civilizations that went astray, and catastrophes which overwhelmed them.      
 
 " The City of Brass "  features a group of travellers on an Archaeology|archaeological expedition     across the Sahara to find an ancient lost city and attempt to recover a brass vessel that Solomon once used to trap a Genie|jinni,     and, along the way, encounter a Mummy|mummified queen, Petrifaction|petrified inhabitants,     lifelike humanoid robots and Automaton|automata, seductive marionettes dancing without strings,     and a brass horseman robot who directs the party towards the ancient city,   which has now become a ghost town.   The  " Third Qalandar's Tale "  also features a robot in the form of an uncanny Sailor|boatman.    
 
 ===Poetry=== 
 There is an abundance of Arabic poetry in ''One Thousand and One Nights''. It is often deployed by stories' narrators to provide detailed descriptions, usually of the beauty of characters. Characters also occasionally quote or speak in verse in certain settings. The uses include but are not limited to: 
 
 * Giving advice, warning, and solutions. 
 * Praising God, royalties and those in power. 
 * Pleading for mercy and forgiveness. 
 * Lamenting wrong decisions or bad luck. 
 * Providing riddles, laying questions, challenges. 
 * Criticizing elements of life, wondering. 
 * Expressing feelings to others or one's self: happiness, sadness, anxiety, surprise, anger. 
 
 In a typical example, expressing feelings of happiness to oneself from Night 203, Prince Qamar Al-Zaman, standing outside the castle, wants to inform Queen Bodour of his arrival.  [ Burton Nights]. Mythfolklore.net (2005-01-01). Retrieved on 2013-09-23.   He wraps his ring in a paper and hands it to the servant who delivers it to the Queen. When she opens it and sees the ring, joy conquers her, and out of happiness she chants this poem:  [ Tale of Nur Al-Din Ali and His Son Badr Al-Din Hasan – The Arabian Nights – The Thousand and One Nights – Sir Richard Burton translator]. Classiclit.about.com  
 
 |lang=ar|italicsoff=no|rtl1=y}} 
 
 Translations: 
 
  
 
 ==In world culture== 
  
 File:Vasnetsov samolet.jpg|thumb|''The Flying Carpet'', a depiction of the hero of Russian folklore, Ivan Tsarevich. 
 
 The influence of the versions of ''The Nights'' on world literature is immense. Writers as diverse as Henry Fielding to Naguib Mahfouz have alluded to the collection by name in their own works. Other writers who have been influenced by the ''Nights'' include John Barth, Jorge Luis Borges, Salman Rushdie, Orhan Pamuk, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe|Goethe, Walter Scott, William Makepeace Thackeray|Thackeray, Wilkie Collins, Elizabeth Gaskell, Charles Nodier|Nodier, Gustave Flaubert|Flaubert, Marcel Schwob, Stendhal, Alexandre Dumas|Dumas, Gérard de Nerval, Arthur de Gobineau|Gobineau, Alexander Pushkin|Pushkin, Leo Tolstoy|Tolstoy, Hugo von Hofmannsthal|Hofmannsthal, Arthur Conan Doyle|Conan Doyle, William Butler Yeats|W. B. Yeats, H. G. Wells, Constantine P. Cavafy|Cavafy, Italo Calvino|Calvino, Georges Perec, H. P. Lovecraft, Marcel Proust, A. S. Byatt and Angela Carter.    
 
 Various characters from this epic have themselves become cultural icons in Western culture, such as Aladdin, Sinbad and Ali Baba. Part of its popularity may have sprung from improved standards of historical and geographical knowledge. The marvelous beings and events typical of fairy tales seem less incredible if they are set further  " long ago "  or farther  " far away " ; this process culminates in the fantasy world having little connection, if any, to actual times and places. Several elements from Arabian mythology are now common in modern fantasy, such as genies, bahamuts, magic carpets, magic lamps, etc. When L. Frank Baum proposed writing a modern fairy tale that banished stereotypical elements, he included the genie as well as the dwarf and the fairy as stereotypes to go.  James Thurber,  " The Wizard of Chitenango " , p. 64 ''Fantasists on Fantasy'' edited by Robert H. Boyer and Kenneth J. Zahorski, .  
 
 In 1982, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) began naming features on Saturn's moon Enceladus (moon)|Enceladus after characters and places in Richard Francis Burton|Burton's translation  Blue, J.; (2006) [ ''Categories for Naming Planetary Features'']. Retrieved November 16, 2006.   because  " its surface is so strange and mysterious that it was given the ''Arabian Nights'' as a name bank, linking fantasy landscape with a literary fantasy. "  [  
 
 ===In Arab culture=== 
 There is little evidence that the ''Nights'' was particularly treasured in the Arab world. It is rarely mentioned in lists of popular literature and few pre-18th-century manuscripts of the collection exist.  Reynolds p. 272   Fiction had a low cultural status among Medieval Arabs compared with poetry, and the tales were dismissed as ''khurafa'' (improbable fantasies fit only for entertaining women and children). According to Robert Irwin,  " Even today, with the exception of certain writers and academics, the ''Nights'' is regarded with disdain in the Arabic world. Its stories are regularly denounced as vulgar, improbable, childish and, above all, badly written. "  Irwin pp. 81–82    
 
 Nevertheless, the ''Nights'' have proved an inspiration to some modern Egyptian writers, such as Tawfiq al-Hakim (author of the Symbolism (arts)|Symbolist play ''Shahrazad'', 1934), Taha Hussein (''Scheherazade's Dreams'', 1943)     and Naguib Mahfouz (''Arabian Nights and Days'', 1979). Idries Shah finds the  abjad numerals|Abjad numerical equivalent of the Arabic title, ''alf layla wa layla'', in the Arabic phrase ''umm el quissa'', meaning  " mother of records. "  He goes on to state that many of the stories  " are encoded Sufi teaching stories, descriptions of psychological processes, or enciphered lore of one kind or another. "    
 
 On a more popular level, film and TV adaptations based on stories like Sinbad and Aladdin enjoyed long lasting popularity in Arabic speaking countries. 
 
  
 ===Early European literature=== 
 Although the first known translation into a European language only appeared in 1704, it is possible that the ''Nights'' began exerting its influence on Western culture much earlier. Christian writers in Medieval Spain translated many works from Arabic, mainly philosophy and mathematics, but also Arab fiction, as is evidenced by Juan Manuel, Prince of Villena|Juan Manuel's story collection ''El Conde Lucanor'' and Ramón Llull's ''The Book of Beasts''.  Irwin pp. 92–94  
 
 Knowledge of the work, direct or indirect, apparently spread beyond Spain. Themes and motifs with parallels in the ''Nights'' are found in Geoffrey Chaucer|Chaucer's ''The Canterbury Tales'' (in ''The Squire's Tale'' the hero travels on a flying brass horse) and Giovanni Boccaccio|Boccaccio's ''Decameron''. Echoes in Giovanni Sercambi's ''Novelle'' and Ludovico Ariosto|Ariosto's ''Orlando Furioso'' suggest that the story of Shahriyar and Shahzaman was also known.  Irwin pp. 96–99   Evidence also appears to show that the stories had spread to the Balkans and a translation of the ''Nights'' into Romanian language|Romanian existed by the 17th century, itself based on a Greek version of the collection.  Irwin pp. 61–62  
 
  
 === Western literature (18th century onwards) === 
 ==== Galland translations (1700s) ==== 
 File:CC No 08 Arabian Nights.jpg|thumb|left|''Classic Comics'' issue #8 
 File:First European edition of Arabian Nights, Les Mille et une Nuit, by Antoine Galland, 1730 CE, Paris.jpg|thumb|First European edition of Arabian Nights,  " Les Mille et une Nuit " , by Antoine Galland, Vol. 11, 1730 CE, Paris 
 File:Arabian Nights, Tousend und Eine Nacht Arabische Erzahlungen, translated into German by Gustav Weil, Vol .4, 1866 CE.jpg|thumb|Arabian Nights,  " Tousend und Eine Nacht, Arabische Erzahlungen " , translated into German by Gustav Weil, Vol .4, 1866 CE, Stuttgart 
 The modern fame of the ''Nights'' derives from the first known European translation by Antoine Galland, which appeared in 1704. According to Robert Irwin (writer)|Robert Irwin, Galland  " played so large a part in discovering the tales, in popularizing them in Europe and in shaping what would come to be regarded as the canonical collection that, at some risk of hyperbole and paradox, he has been called the real author of the ''Nights''. "  Irwin p. 14    
 
 The immediate success of Galland's version with the French public may have been because it coincided with the vogue for ''contes de fées'' ('fairy stories'). This fashion began with the publication of Madame d'Aulnoy's ''Histoire d'Hypolite'' in 1690. D'Aulnoy's book has a remarkably similar structure to the ''Nights'', with the tales told by a female narrator. The success of the ''Nights'' spread across Europe and by the end of the century there were translations of Galland into English, German, Italian, Dutch, Danish, Russian, Flemish and Yiddish.  Reynolds pp. 279–81  
 
 Galland's version provoked a spate of pseudo-Oriental imitations. At the same time, some French writers began to parody the style and concoct far-fetched stories in superficially Oriental settings. These tongue-in-cheek pastiches include Antoine Hamilton|Anthony Hamilton's ''Les quatre Facardins'' (1730), Claude Prosper Jolyot de Crébillon|Crébillon's ''The Sofa: A Moral Tale|Le sopha'' (1742) and Denis Diderot|Diderot's ''The Indiscreet Jewels|Les bijoux indiscrets'' (1748). They often contained veiled allusions to contemporary French society. The most famous example is Voltaire's ''Zadig'' (1748), an attack on religious bigotry set against a vague pre-Islamic Middle Eastern background.  Irwin pp. 238–41   The English versions of the  " Oriental Tale "  generally contained a heavy moralising element,  Irwin p. 242   with the notable exception of William Thomas Beckford|William Beckford's fantasy ''Vathek'' (1786), which had a decisive influence on the development of the Gothic novel. The Polish nobleman Jan Potocki's novel ''The Manuscript Found in Saragossa|Saragossa Manuscript'' (begun 1797) owes a deep debt to the ''Nights'' with its Oriental flavour and labyrinthine series of embedded tales.  Irwin pp. 245–60  
 
 The work was included on a price-list of books on theology, history, and cartography, which was sent by the Scottish bookseller Andrew Millar (then an apprentice) to a Presbyterianism|Presbyterian minister. This is illustrative of the title's widespread popularity and availability in the 1720s.    
 
 ==== 1800s–1900s ==== 
 The ''Nights'' continued to be a favourite book of many British authors of the Romantic and Victorian eras. According to A. S. Byatt,  " In British Romantic poetry the Arabian Nights stood for the wonderful against the mundane, the imaginative against the prosaically and reductively rational. "  A. S. Byatt ''On Histories and Stories'' (Harvard University Press, 2001) p. 167   In their autobiographical writings, both Samuel Taylor Coleridge|Coleridge and Thomas de Quincey|de Quincey refer to nightmares the book had caused them when young. William Wordsworth|Wordsworth and Alfred Lord Tennyson|Tennyson also wrote about their childhood reading of the tales in their poetry.  Wordsworth in Book Five of ''The Prelude''; Tennyson in his poem  " Recollections of the ''Arabian Nights'' " . (Irwin, pp. 266–69)   Charles Dickens was another enthusiast and the atmosphere of the ''Nights'' pervades the opening of his last novel ''The Mystery of Edwin Drood'' (1870).  Irwin p. 270  
 
 Several writers have attempted to add a thousand and second tale,  Byatt p. 168   including Théophile Gautier (''La mille deuxième nuit'', 1842)   and Joseph Roth (''Die Geschichte von der 1002 Nacht'', 1939).   Edgar Allan Poe wrote  " The Thousand-and-Second Tale of Scheherazade "  (1845), a short story depicting the eighth and final voyage of Sinbad the Sailor, along with the various mysteries Sinbad and his crew encounter; the anomalies are then described as footnotes to the story. While the king is uncertain—except in the case of the elephants carrying the world on the back of the turtle—that these mysteries are real, they are actual modern events that occurred in various places during, or before, Poe's lifetime. The story ends with the king in such disgust at the tale Scheherazade has just woven, that he has her executed the very next day. 
 
 Another important literary figure, the Ireland|Irish poet W. B. Yeats was also fascinated by the Arabian Nights, when he wrote in his prose book, A Vision an autobiographical poem, titled The Gift of Harun Al-Rashid,     in relation to his joint experiments with his wife Georgie Hyde-Lees, with Automatic writing. The automatic writing, is a technique used by many occultists in order to discern messages from the subconscious mind or from other spiritual beings, when the hand moves a pencil or a pen, writing only on a simple sheet of paper and when the person's eyes are shut. Also, the gifted and talented wife, is playing in Yeats's poem as  " a gift "  herself, given only allegedly by the caliph to the Christian and Byzantine philosopher Qusta ibn Luqa|Qusta Ibn Luqa, who acts in the poem as a personification of W. B. Yeats. In July 1934 he was asked by Louis Lambert, while in a tour in the United States, which six books satisfied him most. The list that he gave placed the Arabian Nights, secondary only to William Shakespeare's works.    
 
 Modern authors influenced by the ''Nights'' include James Joyce, Marcel Proust, Jorge Luis Borges and John Barth. 
 
  
 === Film and television === 
  
 File:Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp (1917).webm|thumb|thumbtime=6|''Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp'' (1917). 
 
 Stories from the ''One Thousand and One Nights'' have been popular subjects for films, beginning with Georges Méliès' ''The Palace of the Arabian Nights |Le Palais des Mille et une nuits'' (1905). 
 
 The critic Robert Irwin singles out the two versions of ''The Thief of Baghdad'' (The Thief of Bagdad (1924 film)|1924 version directed by Raoul Walsh; The Thief of Bagdad (1940 film)|1940 version produced by Alexander Korda)  and Pier Paolo Pasolini's ''Arabian Nights (1974 film)|Il fiore delle Mille e una notte'' (1974) as ranking  " high among the masterpieces of world cinema. "  Irwin, pp. 291–92    Michael James Lundell calls ''Il fiore''  " the most faithful adaptation, in its emphasis on sexuality, of ''The 1001 Nights'' in its oldest form. "    
 
 UPA (animation studio)|UPA, an American animation studio, produced an animated feature version of ''1001 Arabian Nights (1959 film)|1001 Arabian Nights'' (1959), featuring the cartoon character Mr. Magoo.    
 
 The 1949 animated film ''The Singing Princess'', another movie produced in Italy, is inspired by The Arabian Nights. The animated feature film, ''One Thousand and One Arabian Nights (film)|One Thousand and One Arabian Nights'' (1969), produced in Japan and directed by Osamu Tezuka and Eichii Yamamoto, featured psychedelic art|psychedelic imagery and sounds, and erotic material intended for adults.  [ One Thousand and One Arabian Nights Review (1969)]. Thespinningimage.co.uk. Retrieved on 2013-09-23.  
 
 ''Alif Laila'' (''The Arabian Nights''), a 1993–1997 Indian TV series based on the stories from ''One Thousand and One Nights'' produced by Sagar Films|Sagar Entertainment Ltd, starts with Scheherazade telling her stories to Shahryār, and contains both the well-known and the lesser-known stories from ''One Thousand and One Nights''. 
 
 ''Arabian Nights (TV miniseries)|Arabian Nights'' (2000), a two-part television mini-series adopted for BBC and ABC studios, starring Mili Avital, Dougray Scott, and John Leguizamo, and directed by Steve Barron, is based on the translation by Sir Richard Francis Burton. 
 
 Shabnam Rezaei and Aly Jetha created, and the Vancouver-based Big Bad Boo Studios produced ''1001 Nights (TV series)|1001 Nights'' (2011), an animated television series for children, which launched on Teletoon (Canada)|Teletoon and airs in 80 countries around the world, including Discovery Kids Asia.  [ 1001 Nights heads to Discovery Kids Asia]. Kidscreen (2013-06-13). Retrieved on 2013-09-23.  
 
 ''Arabian Nights (2015 film)|Arabian Nights'' (2015, in Portuguese: ''As Mil e uma Noites''), a three-part film directed by Miguel Gomes (director)|Miguel Gomes, is based on ''One Thousand and One Nights''.  [ The Most Ambitious Movie At This Year's Cannes Film Festival is 'Arabian Nights']. Retrieved on 2015-01-18.  
 
 ===Music=== 
 The ''Nights'' has inspired many pieces of music, including: 
 
 Classical 
 * François-Adrien Boieldieu: ''Le calife de Bagdad'' (1800) 
 * Carl Maria von Weber: ''Abu Hassan'' (1811) 
 * Luigi Cherubini: ''Ali Baba (Cherubini)|Ali Baba'' (1833) 
 * Robert Schumann: ''Scheherazade'' (1848) 
 * Peter Cornelius: ''Der Barbier von Bagdad'' (1858) 
 * Ernest Reyer: ''La statue'' (1861) 
 * C. F. E. Horneman (1840–1906), ''Aladdin'' (overture), 1864 
 * Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov : ''Scheherazade (Rimsky-Korsakov)|Scheherazade''  Op. 35 (1888)  See [ Encyclopædia Iranica] (NB: Some of the dates provided there are wrong)  
 * Tigran Chukhajian (1837–1898), ''Zemire'' (1891) 
 * Maurice Ravel (1875–1937), ''Shéhérazade'' (1898) 
 * Ferrucio Busoni: Piano Concerto (Busoni)|Piano Concerto in C major (1904) 
 * Henri Rabaud: ''Mârouf, savetier du Caire'' (1914) 
 * Carl Nielsen, ''Aladdin (Nielsen)|Aladdin Suite'' (1918–1919) 
 * Collegium musicum, ''Suita po tisic a jednej noci'' (1969) 
 * Fikret Amirov: ''Arabian Nights'' (Ballet, 1979) 
 * Ezequiel Viñao, ''La Noche de las Noches'' (1990) 
 * Carl Davis, ''Aladdin'' (Ballet, 1999) 
 Pop, rock, and metal 
 * Renaissance (band)|Renaissance: ''Scheherazade and Other Stories'' (1975) 
 * Icehouse (band)|Icehouse: ''No Promises (Icehouse song)|No Promises'' (From the album 'Measure for Measure (album)|Measure for Measure') (1986) 
 * Kamelot, ''Nights of Arabia'' (From the album 'The Fourth Legacy') (1999) 
 * Sarah Brightman, ''Harem'' and ''Arabian Nights'' (From the album 'Harem (album) (2003) 
 * Ch!pz,  " 1001 Arabian Nights (song) "  (From the album The World of Ch!pz) (2006) 
 * Nightwish, ''Sahara'' (2007) 
 * Rock On!!, ''Sinbad The Sailor'' (2008) 
 * Abney Park (band), ''Scheherazade'' (2013) 
 Musical Theatre 
 
 * A Thousand And One Nights (From Twisted (musical)|Twisted: The Untold Story of a Royal Vizier) (2013) 
 
 ===Games=== 
 Popular modern games with an ''Arabian Nights'' theme include the ''Prince of Persia'' series, ''Crash Bandicoot: Warped,'' ''Sonic and the Secret Rings'', ''List of Disney's Aladdin video games|Disney's Aladdin'', ''Bookworm Adventures'', and the pinball table, ''Tales of the Arabian Nights (pinball)|Tales of the Arabian Nights.'' 
 
 ===Illustrators=== 
 Many artists have illustrated the ''Arabian nights'', including: Pierre-Clément Marillier for ''Le Cabinet des Fées'' (1785–1789), Gustave Doré, Léon Carré (Granville, 1878 – Alger, 1942), Roger Blachon, Françoise Boudignon, André Dahan, Amato Soro, Albert Robida, Alcide Théophile Robaudi and Marcelino Truong; Vittorio Zecchin (Murano, 1878 – Murano, 1947) and Emanuele Luzzati; The German Morgan; Mohammed Racim (Algiers, 1896 – Algiers 1975), Sani ol-Molk (1849–1856), Anton Pieck and Emre Orhun. 
 
 Famous illustrators for British editions include: Arthur Boyd Houghton, John Tenniel, John Everett Millais and George John Pinwell for Dalziel's Illustrated Arabian Nights Entertainments, published in 1865; Walter Crane for Aladdin's Picture Book (1876); Frank Brangwyn for the 1896 edition of Edward William Lane|Lane's translation; Albert Letchford for the 1897 edition of Burton's translation; Edmund Dulac for Stories from the Arabian Nights (1907), Princess Badoura (1913) and Sindbad the Sailor  &  Other Tales from the Arabian Nights (1914). Others artists include John D. Batten, (Fairy Tales From The Arabian Nights, 1893), Kay Nielsen, Eric Fraser (illustrator)|Eric Fraser, Errol le Cain, Maxfield Parrish, W. Heath Robinson and Arthur Szyk (1954).    
 
 ==Gallery== 
  
 File:Sultan from arabian nights.jpg|The Sultan 
 File:One Thousand and One Nights19.jpg|''One Thousand and One Nights'' book. 
 File:Harun Al-Rashid and the World of the Thousand and One Nights.jpg|Harun ar-Rashid, a leading character of the 1001 Nights 
 File:Sinbad the Sailor (5th Voyage).jpg|The fifth voyage of Sindbad 
 File:Harvey W, 1001 nights (12).jpg|William Harvey (artist)|William Harvey, ''The Fifth Voyage of Es-Sindbad of the Sea'', 1838–40, woodcut 
 File:Harvey W, 1001 nights (19).jpg|William Harvey (artist)|William Harvey, ''The Story of the City of Brass'', 1838–40, woodcut 
 File:Harvey W, 1001 nights (11).jpg|William Harvey (artist)|William Harvey, ''The Story of the Two Princes El-Amjad and El-As'ad'', 1838–40, woodcut 
 File:Harvey W, 1001 nights (14).jpg|William Harvey (artist)|William Harvey, ''The Story of Abd Allah of the Land and Abd Allah of the Sea'' 
 File:Harvey W, 1001 nights (3).jpg|William Harvey (artist)|William Harvey, ''The Story of the Fisherman'', 1838–40, woodcut 
 File:Gross F, 9. Nacht, 1001 Nacht, Bd 1, 1838.jpg|Friedrich Gross, ante 1830, woodcut 
 File:Gross F, 66. Nacht, 1001 Nacht, Bd 1, 1838.jpg|Friedrich Gross, ante 1830, woodcut 
 File:Gross F, 72. Nacht, 1001 Nacht, Bd 1, 1838.jpg|Friedrich Gross, ante 1830, woodcut 
 File:Gross F, 269. Nacht, 1001 Nacht, Bd 2, 1839.jpg|Friedrich Gross, ante 1830, woodcut 
 File:Gross F, 436. Nacht, 1001 Nacht, Bd 2, 1839.jpg|Friedrich Gross, ante 1830, woodcut 
 File:Gross F, 231. Nacht, 1001 Nacht, Bd 1, 1838.jpg|Friedrich Gross, ante 1830, woodcut 
 File:Gross F, 251. Nacht, 1001 Nacht, Bd 2, 1839.jpg|Friedrich Gross, ante 1830, woodcut 
 File:Gross F, 109. Nacht, 1001 Nacht, Bd 1, 1838.jpg|Friedrich Gross, ante 1830, woodcut 
 File:Brangwyn, Arabian Nights, Vol 3, 1896 (1).jpg|Frank Brangwyn, ''Story of Abon-Hassan the Wag'' ( " He found himself upon the royal couch " ), 1895–96, watercolour and tempera on millboard 
 File:Brangwyn, Arabian Nights, Vol 1, 1896 (2).jpg|Frank Brangwyn, ''Story of the Merchant'' ( " Sheherezade telling the stories " ), 1895–96, watercolour and tempera on millboard 
 File:Brangwyn, Arabian Nights, Vol 4, 1896 (1).jpg|Frank Brangwyn, ''Story of Ansal-Wajooodaud, Rose-in-Bloom'' ( " The daughter of a Visier sat at a lattice window " ), 1895–96, watercolour and tempera on millboard 
 File:Brangwyn, Arabian Nights, Vol 5, 1896 (2).jpg|Frank Brangwyn, ''Story of Gulnare'' ( " The merchant uncovered her face " ), 1895–96, watercolour and tempera on millboard 
 File:Brangwyn, Arabian Nights, Vol 5,1896 (3).jpg|Frank Brangwyn, ''Story of Beder Basim'' ( " Whereupon it became eared corn " ), 1895–96, watercolour and tempera on millboard 
 File:Brangwyn, Arabian Nights, Vol 6, 1896 (4).jpg|Frank Brangwyn, ''Story of Abdalla'' ( " Abdalla of the sea sat in the water, near the shore " ), 1895–96, watercolour and tempera on millboard 
 File:Brangwyn, Arabian Nights, Vol 3, 1896 (5).jpg|Frank Brangwyn, ''Story of Mahomed Ali'' ( " He sat his boat afloat with them " ), 1895–96, watercolour and tempera on millboard 
 File:Brangwyn, Arabian Nights, Vol 4, 1896 (6).jpg|Frank Brangwyn, ''Story of the City of Brass'' ( " They ceased not to ascend by that ladder " ), 1895–96, watercolour and tempera on millboard 
  
 
 ==See also== 
  
  
 * Arabic literature 
 * Hamzanama 
 * List of One Thousand and One Nights characters|List of ''One Thousand and One Nights'' characters 
 * List of stories within One Thousand and One Nights|List of stories from ''The Book of One Thousand and One Nights'' (translation by Richard Francis Burton|R. F. Burton) 
 * List of works influenced by One Thousand and One Nights|List of works influenced by ''One Thousand and One Nights'' 
 * Persian literature 
 * Shahnameh 
 * Ghost story|Ghost stories 
 
 == Citations == 
  
 
 == General sources == 
 * Robert Irwin (writer)|Robert Irwin ''The Arabian Nights: A Companion'' (Tauris Parke, 1994) 
 * David Pinault ''Story-Telling Techniques in the Arabian Nights'' (Brill Publishers, 1992) 
 * Ulrich Marzolph, Richard van Leeuwen, Hassan Wassouf,''The Arabian Nights Encyclopedia'' (2004) 
 * Ulrich Marzolph (ed.) ''The Arabian Nights Reader'' (Wayne State University Press, 2006) 
 * Dwight Reynolds,  " ''A Thousand and One Nights'': a history of the text and its reception "  in ''The Cambridge History of Arabic Literature'' Vol 6. (CUP 2006) 
 * Eva Sallis ''Scheherazade Through the Looking-Glass: The Metamorphosis of the Thousand and One Nights'' (Routledge, 1999), 
 * Yamanaka, Yuriko and Nishio, Tetsuo (ed.) ''The Arabian Nights and Orientalism – Perspectives from East and West'' (I.B. Tauris, 2006)  
 * Ch. Pellat,  " Alf Layla Wa Layla "  in Encyclopædia Iranica.  Online Access June 2011 at [ 
 
 ==Further reading== 
 * ''Where Is A Thousand Tales? [Hezar Afsan Kojast?]'' by Bahram Beyzai, Roshangaran va Motale'ate Zanan, 2012. 
 *  Chauvin, Victor Charles; Schnurrer, Christian Friedrich von. ''Bibliographie des ouvrages arabes ou relatifs aux Arabes, publiés dans l'Europe chrétienne de 1810 à 1885''. Líege H. Vaillant-Carmanne. 1892–1922. 
 * El-Shamy, Hasan.  " A 'Motif Index of Alf Laylah Wa Laylah': Its Relevance to the Study of Culture, Society, the Individual, and Character Transmutation " . ''Journal of Arabic Literature'', vol. 36, no. 3, 2005, pp. 235–268. . Accessed 22 Apr. 2020. 
 * Horta, Paulo Lemos, ''Marvellous Thieves: The Secret Authors of the Arabian Nights'' (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017). 
 * Kennedy, Philip F., and Marina Warner, eds. Scheherazade's Children: Global Encounters with the Arabian Nights. NYU Press, 2013. . 
 * Marzolph, Ulrich, 'Arabian Nights', in ''Encyclopaedia of Islam'', 3rd ed. (Leiden: Brill, 2007–),  
 * [ ''The Islamic Context of The Thousand and One Nights''] by Muhsin J. al-Musawi, Columbia University Press, 2009. 
 * Nurse, Paul McMichael. ''Eastern Dreams: How the Arabian Nights Came to the World'' Viking Canada: 2010. General popular history of the 1001 Nights from its earliest days to the present. 
 * Shah, Tahir, ''In Arabian Nights: A search of Morocco through its stories and storytellers'' (Doubleday, 2007). 
 
 ==External links== 
  
  
  
  
 * 
 *[ ''The Thousand Nights and a Night'' in several classic translations], including the Sir Richard Francis Burton unexpurgated translation and John Payne translation, with additional material. 
 *[ ''1001 Nights''] 
 *[ ''The Arabian Nights Entertainments''], Selected and Edited by Andrew Lang, Longmans, Green and Co., 1918 (1898). 
 *[ ''The Arabian Nights''], BBC Radio 4 discussion with Robert Irwin, Marina Warner and Gerard van Gelder (''In Our Time'', October 18, 2007) 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 Category:One Thousand and One Nights|  
 Category:Arab culture 
 Category:Arabian mythology 
 Category:Arabic literature 
 Category:Medieval Arabic literature 
 Category:Frame stories 
 Category:Iranian folklore 
 Category:Iraqi folklore 
 Category:Egyptian folklore 
 Category:Persian literature 
 Category:Persian mythology 
 Category:Articles containing video clips 
 Category:Erotic literature 
 Category:Erotic fiction