 
  
 
 ''The Holocaust Industry: Reflections on the Exploitation of Jewish Suffering'' is a 2000 book by Norman Finkelstein, in which the author argues that the American Jews|American Jewish The Establishment|establishment exploits the memory of the Nazi The Holocaust|Holocaust for political and financial gain, as well as to further the interests of Israel.  See article on [ & ar=11 Norman Finklestein's webpage] .   According to Finkelstein, this  " Holocaust industry "  has corrupted Jewish culture and the authentic memory of the Holocaust. 
 
 ==Finkelstein on the book== 
 Finkelstein states that his consciousness of  " the Nazi holocaust "  is rooted in his parents' experiences in the Warsaw Ghetto; with the exception of his parents themselves,  " every family member on both sides was exterminated by the Nazis " .  The Holocaust Industry, p. 5-8.   Nonetheless, during his childhood, no one ever asked any questions about what his mother and father had suffered. He suggests,   " This was not a respectful silence. It was indifference. "   It was only after the establishment of  " the Holocaust industry " , he suggests, that outpourings of anguish over the plight of the Jews in World War II began.  This ideology in turn served to endow Israel with a status as  " 'victim' state "  despite its  " horrendous "  human rights record.  
 
 According to Finkelstein, his book is  " an anatomy and an indictment of the Holocaust industry " . He argues that  " 'The Holocaust' is an ideological representation of the Nazi holocaust " .  The Holocaust Industry, p. 3.  
 
 In the foreword to the first paperback edition, Finkelstein notes that the first hardback edition had been a considerable hit in several European countries and many languages, but had been largely ignored in the United States. He sees ''The New York Times'' as the main promotional vehicle of the  " Holocaust industry " , and says that the 1999 Index listed 273 entries for the Holocaust and just 32 entries for the entire continent of Africa. 
 
 ==Chapters== 
 *Chapter 1: ''Capitalizing The Holocaust'' - by the 1980s, Finkelstein states, the  " War against the Jews "  had become more important to American cultural life than the  " War Between the States " .(p. & nbsp;11) 
 *Chapter 2: ''Hoaxers, Hucksters and History'' - in 1967, Finkelstein claims that two concepts appeared in public discourse: The uniqueness of the Holocaust, and the concept of the Holocaust as climax of a historical irrational anti-Semitism|anti-Semitic tendency in Europe. Finkelstein asserts that these concepts became central to the  " Holocaust Industry " , but that neither figures in scholarship of the Nazi Holocaust.(p. & nbsp;13) 
 *Chapter 3: ''The Double Shakedown'' - in this chapter, Finkelstein claims that the number of Jewish Holocaust survivors|survivors of the Holocaust recognized by relief groups increased from c. 100,000 in 1945  Henry Friedlander,  " Darkness and Dawn in 1945: The Nazis, the Allies, and the Survivors, "  in US Holocaust Memorial Museum, 1945 - the Year of Liberation (Washington: 1995), 11-35. Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.81.   to nearly 1 million  1997 study commissioned by the Israeli Prime Minister's office.(p.67)   owing to definitional changes in who was considered to be a survivor. Because of this, Finkelstein repeatedly asserts that fraudulent claims were made on Switzerland, while accounts and assets in the US and Israel were ignored. Payments were made to the wrong people and real survivors lost out. 
 The second (2003) edition contained 100 pages of new material, primarily in chapter 3 on the World Jewish Congress lawsuit against Swiss banks. Finkelstein set out to provide a guide to the relevant sections of the case. He feels that the presiding judge elected not to docket crucial documents, and that the Claims Resolution Tribunal could no longer be trusted. Finkelstein claims the CRT was on course to vindicate the Swiss banks before it changed tack in order to  " protect the blackmailers' reputation " . 
 
 ==Reviews and critiques== 
  
 In addition to  support from individuals such as Noam Chomsky and Alexander Cockburn, the Holocaust historian Raul Hilberg praised Finkelstein's book:   
 .  }} 
 
 The book received negative reviews. According to Israelis|Israeli journalist Yair Sheleg, in August 2000, German historian Hans Mommsen called it  " a most trivial book, which appeals to easily aroused anti-Semitic prejudices. "     Wolfgang Benz stated to ''Le Monde'':  " It is impossible to learn anything from Finkelstein's book. At best, it is interesting for a psychotherapist. "  " Polémique et curiosité en Allemagne " , ''Le Monde'', 16 February 2001.   The reviewer of this daily added that Norman Finkelstein  " hardly cares about nuance "  Jean Birnbaum,  " Le débat s'ouvre autour du livre contesté « L'Industrie de l'Holocauste » " , ''Le Monde'', February 16, 2001.   and Rony Brauman wrote in the preface to the French edition (''L'Industrie de l'Holocauste'', Paris, La Fabrique, 2001) that some assertions of N. Finkelstein (especially on the impact of the Six-days war) are wrong, others being pieces of  " propaganda " . Historian Peter Novick, whose work Finkelstein described as providing the  " initial stimulus "  for ''The Holocaust Industry'',     asserted in the July 28, 2000 issue of ''The Jewish Chronicle'' (London) that the book is replete with  " false accusations " ,  " egregious misrepresentations " ,  " absurd claims "  and  " repeated mis-statements "  ( " A charge into darkness that sheds no light " ). Finkelstein replied to the allegations by Novick on his homepage.   & ar=165   Hasia Diner has accused Peter Novick and Finkelstein of being  " harsh critics of American Jewry from the left, "  and challenges the notion reflected in their books that American Jews did not begin to commemorate the Holocaust until after 1967.  All Quiet; Were postwar American Jews really ‘silent’ about the Holocaust? BY ADAM KIRSCH | 7:00 am June 23, 2009, Tablet Magazine [  
 
 Andrew Ross, reviewing the book for ''Salon magazine|Salon'', wrote: 
  by Andrew Ross  }} Alvin Hirsch Rosenfeld wrote that ''The Holocaust Industry''  " is representative of a polemical engagement with the Holocaust "  that places it in line with a number of other works  by  " critics of Holocaust consciousness, all of whom stress the utilitarian function of memory " , and who see many modern references to The Holocaust as  " means of enhancing ethnic identity and advancing political agendas of one kind or another " . Rosenfeld also noted that the book presents those ideas in a very  " harsh and inflammatory way. "    
 
 Jonathan Freedland in a column for ''The Guardian'' wrote that unlike Novick's book, ''The Holocaust Industry'' does not share its  " sensitivity or human empathy - surely prerequisites of any meaningful debate about the Holocaust " . Freedland accused Finkelstein of having constructed  " an elaborate conspiracy theory, in which the Jews were pushed from apathy to obsession about the Holocaust by a corrupt Jewish leadership bent on building international support for Israel " .    
 
 ===Finkelstein's response to critics=== 
 Finkelstein responded to his critics in the foreword to the second edition, writing  " Mainstream critics allege that I conjured a 'conspiracy theory' while those on the Left-wing politics|Left ridicule the book as a defense of 'the banks'.  None, so far as I can tell, question my actual findings. " 
 
 ==Other topics== 
 
 ===Fraudulent writings on the Holocaust=== 
 Finkelstein claims that there are two known frauds connected to the Holocaust, that of ''The Painted Bird'' by Polish writer Jerzy Kosinski  & ndash; which was published as fiction  & ndash; and ''Fragments'' by Binjamin Wilkomirski. He claims that Kosinski and Wilkomirski were defended even after their supposed frauds had been exposed. He identifies some of the defenders as members of the  " Holocaust Industry " , and writes that they also support each other. Elie Wiesel supported Kosinski; Israel Gutman and Daniel Goldhagen (see below) supported Wilkomirski; Wiesel and Gutman support Goldhagen.    
 
 ===Armenian Genocide=== 
 Finkelstein compares the media treatment of the Holocaust and the Armenian Genocide, particularly by members of what he calls  " The Holocaust Industry " . One to 1.5 million Armenians died in the years between 1915 and 1917/1923 - Armenian Genocide denial|denial includes the claim that they were the result of a civil war within World War I, or refusal to accept there were deaths. In 2001, Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres went so far as to dismiss it as  " allegations " . However, by this time historical consensus was changing, and, according to Finkelstein, he was  " angrily compared ... to a holocaust denier "  by Israel Charny, executive director of the Institute on the Holocaust and Genocide in Jerusalem.  [ Peres stands accused over denial of `meaningless' Armenian Holocaust " ]. Findarticle archive of Independent 18 April 2001. Verified 22 Jun 2008.  
 
 ===Forms of Holocaust denial=== 
 According to Finkelstein, Elie Wiesel characterized any suggestion that he has profited from the  " Holocaust Industry " , or even any criticism at all, as Holocaust denial.  Wiesel, All Rivers, 333, 336. Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.70.   Questioning a survivor's testimony, denouncing the role of Jewish collaborators, suggesting that Germans suffered during the bombing of Dresden or that any state except Germany committed crimes in World War II are all evidence of Holocaust denial – according to Deborah Lipstadt  Lipstadt, ''Denying the Holocaust'', 6, 12, 22, 89-90. Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.70.   – and Finkelstein says the most  " insidious "  forms of Holocaust denial are  " immoral equivalencies " , denying the uniqueness of The Holocaust.  Lipstadt, ''Denying the Holocaust'', chapter 11. Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.70.   Finkelstein examines the implications of applying this standard to another member of the  " Holocaust Industry " , Daniel Goldhagen, who argued that Serbian actions in Kosovo  " are, in their essence, different from those of Nazi Germany only in scale " .  " A New Serbia "  in New Republic (17 May 1999). Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.70.  
 
 ===Holocaust deniers in real life=== 
  
 According to Finkelstein, Deborah Lipstadt claims there is widespread Holocaust denial, though he says her prime example in ''Denying the Holocaust'' (1993) is Arthur Butz, author of ''The Hoax of the Twentieth Century''. The chapter on him is entitled  " Entering the Mainstream "  - but Finkelstein considers that, were it not for the likes of Lipstadt, no one would ever have heard of Arthur Butz. Finkelstein claims that Holocaust deniers have as much influence in the US as the Flat Earth Society (p. & nbsp;69). 
 
 ==Publishing history== 
 Publishing history of ''The Holocaust Industry'': 
 *2000; First published, by Verso Books (London) 150 p. Hardcover,      (Blue star of David on cover) 
 *2001; First paperback edition,  Verso.   (Yellow star of David on cover) 
 *2003;  Second edition, expanded; 286 p., paperback, Verso.    (Red star of David on cover) 
 
 ==See also== 
 *Nazi gold 
 *Claims Conference 
 *''The Holocaust in American Life'' 
 *Jewish lobby 
 *''Image and Reality of the Israel–Palestine Conflict'' 
 
 ==References== 
  
 
 ==External links== 
 *[ Author's web page for the book] 
 * 
 *[ ] 
 * 
 *[  " The business of death " ] (Extracted from The Holocaust Industry by Norman G Finkelstein), ''The Guardian'' (Wednesday July 12, 2000). 
 *[  " Swiss toll II " ], (Extracted from The Holocaust Industry by Norman G Finkelstein), ''The Guardian'' (Thursday July 13, 2000). 
 *[  " It Takes an Enormous Amount of Courage to Speak the Truth When No One Else is Out There "  -- World-Renowned Holocaust, Israel Scholars Defend DePaul Professor Norman Finkelstein as He Fights for Tenure] (Raul Hilberg and Avi Shlaim speak in support of Norman Finkelstein's scholarship and  " The Holocaust Industry "  specifically.) 
 
  
 Category:2000 non-fiction books 
 Category:American political books 
 Category:Books by Norman Finkelstein 
 Category:Books critical of Zionism 
 Category:English-language books 
 Category:Holocaust historiography 
 Category:Verso Books books