 
  
 ''The Number of the Beast'' is a science fiction novel by American  writer Robert A. Heinlein, published in 1980. Excerpts from the novel were serialized in the magazine ''Omni (magazine)|Omni'' (1979 October, November). 
 
 ==Plot== 
 The book is a series of diary entries primarily by each of the four main characters: Zebadiah  " Zeb "  John Carter, programmer Dejah Thoris  " Deety "  Burroughs Carter, her mathematics professor father Jacob Burroughs, and off-campus socialite Hilda Corners. The names  " Dejah Thoris, "   " Burroughs, "  and  " Carter "  are overt references to John Carter of Mars|John Carter and Dejah Thoris, the protagonists of the Barsoom novels by Edgar Rice Burroughs. 
 
 In the opening, Deety is dancing with Zeb at a party at Hilda's mansion. Deety is trying to get Zeb to meet her father to discuss what she thinks is an article Zeb wrote about n-dimensional space, even going so far as to offer herself. Zeb figures out and explains to Deety that he is not the one who wrote the article but a relative with a similar name. 
 
 After dancing a very intimate tango, Zeb jokingly suggests the dance was so strong they should get married, and Deety agrees. Zeb is taken aback but then accepts. As they are leaving, Deety and Zeb rescue Jacob from a heated argument he is having with another faculty member before a fight breaks out. As they are approaching their vehicles, Hilda comes out, deciding to tag along. Zeb, having a premonition, grabs the three of them and ducks behind another vehicle before Jacob and Deety's vehicle explodes. Zeb gets everyone into his modified air car ''Gay Deceiver'' and by activating the ''Deceivers flying capability, escapes undetected by the authorities or the criminals who put a bomb in the other vehicle. 
 
 Zeb flies to Elko, Nevada, the state being the only one to allow people to get married 24 hours a day with no waiting period or blood test. The incidents have so traumatized Jacob that he has agreed to marry Hilda and so they have a double ceremony. The couples then go to Jacob's hidden cabin in the woods, where they have their honeymoons. 
 
 Thus begins the series of adventures that the four embark upon as they travel in the ''Gay Deceiver'', which is equipped with the professor's  " continua "  device and armed by the Australian Defence Force. The continua device was built by Professor Burroughs while he was formulating his theories on n-dimensional non-Euclidean geometry. The geometry of the novel's universe contains six dimensions; the three spatial dimensions known to the real world, and three time dimensions: ''t'', the real world's temporal dimension, ''τ'' (tau), and ''т'' (teh). The continua device can travel on all six axes. The continua device allows travel into various fictional universes, such as the Land of Oz, as well as through time. An attempt to visit Barsoom takes them to an apparently-different version of Mars, seemingly under the colonial rule of the British Empire|British and Russian Empire|Russian Empires, but near the end of the novel, Heinlein's recurring character Lazarus Long hints that they had traveled to Barsoom and that its  " colonial "  status was an illusion imposed on them by the telepathy|telepathically adept Barsoomians: 
 
  
 
 ===Title=== 
 In the novel, the Number of the beast|biblical number of the beast turns out to be not 666 (number)|666 but   (6^6)^6   or 10,314,424,798,490,535,546,171,949,056,  note: not   6^{6^6}  , which is a far bigger number   the initial number of parallel universe (fiction)|parallel universes accessible through the continua device.  It is later theorized by the character Jacob that the number may be merely the instantly accessible universes from a given location and that there is a larger structure that implies an infinite number of universes. 
 
 ==Writing style== 
 The novel lies somewhere between parody and Homage (arts)|homage in its deliberate use of the style of the 1930s' pulp magazine|pulp novels. Many of the plot lines and characters are derived directly from the pulps, as referenced by the first line of the novel: 
 
  
 
 ''The Number of the Beast'' contains many in-jokes and references to the author. The name of every villain is an anagram of a name or pen name of Robert or Virginia Heinlein. 
 
 As in many of his later works, Heinlein refers to the idea of solipsism, but in this book develops it into an idea he called  " World as Myth, "  the idea that universes are created by the act of imagination|imagining them and so all fictional worlds are, in fact, real and all real worlds are figments of fictional figures' fancy, which is why Heinlein uses the Ouroboros symbology in later works like ''The Cat Who Walks Through Walls''. That also plays into the ideology of  " Thou Art God "  from Heinlein's earlier work ''Stranger in a Strange Land''. 
 
 ==Literary significance and reception== 
 Jack Kirwan wrote in ''National Review'' that the novel is  " about two men and two women in a time machine safari through this and other universes. But describing ''The Number of the Beast'' thus is like saying ''Moby Dick'' is about a one-legged guy trying to catch a fish. "  He went on to state that Heinlein celebrates the  " competent person. "    
 
 Sue K. Hurwitz wrote in her review for the ''School Library Journal'' that it is  " a catalog of Heinlein's sins as an author; it is sophomoric, sexist, militantly right wing, and excessively verbose "  and commentary that the book's ending was  " a devastating parody of SF conventions & mdash;will have genre addicts rolling on the floor. It's garbage, but right from the top of the heap. "    
 
 Heinlein buff Gharlane of Eddore (pen name)|David Potter explained on alt.fan.heinlein, in a posting reprinted on the Heinlein Society, that the entire book is actually  " one of the greatest textbooks on narrative fiction ever produced, with a truly magnificent set of examples of HOW NOT TO DO IT right there in the foreground, and constant explanations of how to do it right, with literary references to people and books that DID do it right, in the background. "  He noted that  " every single time there's a boring lecture or tedious character interaction going on in the foreground, there's an example of how to do it RIGHT in the background. "    
 
 Greg Costikyan reviewed ''The Number of the Beast'' in ''Ares (magazine)|Ares Magazine'' #5 and commented,  " No one writes like Heinlein, and what is a disappointment from him would be a smashing success from anyone else. "    
 
 ===''The Pursuit of the'' Pankera=== 
 On 1 February 2019, it was announced that a novel, ''The Pursuit of the Pankera'', would be published from an unpublished Heinlein manuscript. The book was originally titled ''Six-Six-Six''. The 185,000-word text mirrors ''The Number of the Beast'' for the first third but then deviates from it.      The more-traditionally Heinlein text was written before ''Number of the Beast'' but not published for unknown reasons.    
 
 ==References== 
  
 
 ==External links== 
 *  
 *  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 Category:1980 American novels 
 Category:1980 science fiction novels 
 Category:American science fiction novels 
 Category:Barsoom 
 Category:Metafictional novels 
 Category:Flying cars in fiction 
 Category:Novels by Robert A. Heinlein 
 Category:Oz (franchise) books 
 Category:Works originally published in Omni (magazine)