 
 Puppet Master}} 
 
  
  
 
 ''The Puppet Masters'' is a 1951 science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, in which American secret agents battle parasitic invaders from outer space. It was originally serialized in ''Galaxy Science Fiction'' (September, October, November 1951). 
 
 The novel evokes a sense of paranoia and Heinlein repeatedly makes explicit the analogy between the Parasites in fiction|mind-controlling parasites and the Communist Russians, echoing the prevailing Second Red Scare in the United States. 
 
 The book takes up the then common theme of sightings of ''Flying saucers'', the plot assuming that the  " saucers "  seen in the 1950s were part of a preliminary reconnaissance of Earth, carried out by the extraterrestrials in preparation for a full-fledged invasion sixty years later.  
 
 ==Setting== 
 The novel's first scene is set in 2007. Following a nuclear war between the Soviet Union and the Western Bloc, which left both sides battered but unbroken, both sides return to a state of Cold War. Washington, DC and other US cities devastated in nuclear strikes had been completely rebuilt. The Soviet Union and China remain a single bloc dominated by Moscow, and the sharp Sino-Soviet split of the late 1950s never happened. 
 
 Social customs have changed somewhat, in a way typical for Heinlein's fiction (i.e. having become more liberal, such as Prenuptial agreement|marriage contracts being possible with fixed terms, etc.) and Raygun|ray guns and personal flying cars are commonplace. Space stations exist and Space colonization|colonies have been Colonization of Venus|established on the planet Venus (depicted, as common in SF of the time, as a tropical planet habitable by humans). 
 
 Space technology is far more advanced than in the actual first decade of the 21st century. For example, in the last scene, a space warship is sent on a twelve-year trip to Titan (moon)|Titan, with not only life-support for a large crew, but also enough armaments & nbsp;— presumably Nuclear weapon|nuclear & nbsp;— to confront an entire world on its own. 
 
 However, communications satellites have not been thought of, and television broadcasts are still limited to line-of-sight, as they were at the time of writing. This is of critical importance to the plot. The territory of the United States is divided into numerous transmission blocks, which receive television broadcasts from their neighbors and relay them onwards. When the invaders seize one of these blocks, they effectively control all communications within it and can isolate its inhabitants from the outside world, deny the central government any access to them, and consolidate control at their leisure. 
 
 The current President - on his second term, and therefore presumably elected in 2000 - had established directly upon being first elected a new intelligence agency, known as The Section. Its  creation was never authorized by Congress and its existence is kept secret, being funded by sums diverted from innocuous sounding items in the Budget. It has a disguised underground headquarters in Washington D.C. and a network of similarly disguised branch offices around the US. Unlike the clearly demarked spheres of the FBI and CIA, the Section carries out extensive espionage in Soviet territory, but also conducts operations inside the United States. If ordered to, its agents are ready to shoot and kill American citizens on US soil. The Section's Director, who had been the President's campaign manager, is universally called  " The Old Man " . Only gradually does the reader learn that he is the protagonist's actual father. 
 
 ==Plot== 
 File:Galaxy 195109.jpg|thumb|right|The opening installment of ''The Puppet Masters'' took the cover of the September 1951 issue of ''Galaxy Science Fiction'' 
 In the summer of 2007, Earth is under clandestine attack.  Slug-like creatures, arriving in flying saucers, are attaching themselves to people's backs, taking control of their victims' nervous systems, and manipulating those people as puppets.  The Old Man, the head of a clandestine national security agency called the Section, goes to Des Moines, Iowa, with Sam and Mary, two of his best agents, to investigate a flying saucer report, but much more seriously the ominous disappearance of the six agents sent previously. They discover that the slugs are steadily taking over Des Moines, but they cannot convince the President of the United States|US president to declare an emergency. 
 
 Sam takes two other agents and returns to Des Moines to get more evidence of the invasion.  They fail and are obliged to leave the city quickly, but in the confusion of their fleeing the city's television center a slug sneaks onto one of the agents.  Back in Washington the team discovers the slug and captures it, but later it escapes and attaches itself to Sam, using Sam's skills and knowledge to make a clean escape. 
 
 Thoroughly puppetized, Sam begins to infiltrate more slugs into the city, using the Constitution Club as a recruiting center.  The Old Man captures him, takes him to Section's new headquarters, and coerces Sam into being taken by the slug again. Under drug-induced hypnosis Sam reveals that the slugs come from Titan (moon)|Titan, the sixth moon of Saturn. Being forced into a traumatic situation strains Sam's relationship with both Mary and the Old Man. Later, Sam finds that the President and United States House of Representatives|Congress are ready to accept the idea that the United States has been infiltrated and they mandate a law that requires people to go naked to demonstrate that they are not carrying slugs. 
 
 As the United States Army|US Army prepares a counter-attack in the most heavily infested areas, Sam goes alone to Kansas City to get an estimate of the number of slugs involved.  There he learns that he can kill a slug by crushing it with his hand.  He also discovers that the slugs reproduce through fission - which means that there are far more of them then the army realized when making its plans, and therefore the plan in doomed to failure.  Escaping from the city, he returns to Washington too late to stop the counter-attack, which fails; the invading soldiers are either killed or captured by the slugs, who thus gain control of a corps of trained combat soldiers. . 
 
 After a short leave, during which they get married and have a brief happy honeymoon - rudely interrupted by a slug that seems to have been targeting Sam for repossession and whom they very barely manage to kill. Recalled to ugly reality, Sam and Mary return to work. Together with the Old Man, they go to Pass Christian, Mississippi to inspect a flying saucer that had made a bad landing.  Inside the alien ship Mary is overwhelmed by repressed memories from the time she was a child on Venus and had been possessed by a slug.  The slug had died from Nine-day Fever, a severe disease native to Venus, but Mary, luckily, had survived the disease. 
 
 Adopting biological warfare, the authorities culture Nine-day Fever and its cure in bulk sufficient to cover the country, and then infected slugs are allowed to escape into the heavily infested areas.  Several days later thousands of medics are landed in those areas to give the cure to those people whose slugs have died.  Sam and the Old Man join the effort in Jefferson City, Missouri, but the Old Man is possessed by the last healthy slug in the city and he knocks Sam out. 
 
 Sam regains consciousness in an air-car that the Old Man is flying to the Yucatán, where the slug intends to restart its effort to conquer Humanity.  With the car on autopilot, the Old Man slumps over the steering wheel and the slug begins to fission so that it can possess both the Old Man and Sam.  In desperation, Sam kicks the controls, causing the air-car to accelerate so sharply that the Old Man is slammed back against the seat forcefully enough to crush the slug.  The air-car's emergency system mitigates the resulting crash and Sam and the Old Man wait to be rescued. 
 
 Some years later Sam and Mary board a spaceship headed for Saturn on a mission to exterminate the slugs (or at least deliver a serious blow and blunt their appetite for conquest). Sam expresses the hope that a way would be found to save the small elf-like inhabitants of Titan, whom the slugs enslaved before they turned their attention to other planets and with whom Humanity  " might get along " . 
 
 While the invasion was decisively defeated in the US territory, the situation in the rest of the world remains unclear. There is a reference to the slugs having invaded and effectively taken over the Eastern Bloc, some months before invading the United States - but their ignoring basic hygiene had caused a major outbreak of Bubonic Plague, leading to a  total breakdown of public order in both Russia and China. It remains unclear, however, if that had the same effect of eliminating the slugs as the planned biological warfare resorted to by the Americans. Sam is seen remarking cynically that  " it makes no real difference "  - evidently, whether or not the Soviet Union is dominated by slugs, the Cold War will continue. 
 
 There is also a reference to Britain refusing to follow the US in having its citizens strip down - though the King was willing to go along, the Anglican Church put a veto on the idea - which means that Britain might be taken over by the slugs. The book makes no mention of what the US would do about that. 
 
 ==Characters== 
 *Sam, born Elihu Nivens, is the classic Heinlein hero, multi-talented, independent, fiercely loyal to friends and an implacable enemy to foes. He is thirtyish, but has changed appearance so many times even he has doubts as to how he originally looked. 
 *Mary, born ''Allucquere'' in a religious commune in Antarctica before growing up on Venus, is Heinlein's classic heroine.  She is beautiful, red-headed, hard-nosed and brilliant. Sam describes her as having the  " real redheaded saurian bony structure to her skull " . Her professional exterior conceals psychological scars from her encounter with the slugs as a child. Only the Old Man knows the truth about her, thanks to the deep hypnotic analysis that all agents have to undergo. 
 *The Old Man, born Andrew Nivens, is the head of a top secret government agency that he wishes did not have to exist, doing his job reluctantly because nobody else would do it properly. He represents the third of Heinlein's favorite types of character, the  " wise, grumpy old man " .  He is the first in the line that includes Jubal Harshaw, The Moon Is A Harsh Mistress|Professor Bernardo de la Paz, I Will Fear No Evil|Johann Sebastian Bach Smith, Gulf (novella)#Characters| " Kettle Belly "  Baldwin, and the later life of Lazarus Long. (Lazarus Long's grandfather, who has a major role in the later part of ''Time Enough for Love'', is particularly similar in character to  " The Old Man " .) 
 
 ==Alternative version== 
 Heinlein's original version of the novel was 96,000 words, and was cut to about 60,000 words for both the 1951 book version and the serialization in ''Galaxy Science Fiction''. For the ''Galaxy'' version, editor H. L. Gold also did extensive rewriting, to which Heinlein strenuously objected.    
 
 In 1990, two years after Heinlein's death, an expanded version was published with the consent of his widow, Virginia Heinlein. This edition contained material that had been cut from the original published version, because the book was deemed to be too long and controversial for the market in 1951. The uncut version seemed more risqué in 1951 than it did decades later. For example, in the uncut version the book begins with Sam waking up in bed with a blonde whom he had casually picked up the evening before, without even bothering to learn her name; the older version  omitted all mention of her. The 1951 version does mention that men possessed by the invaders lost all sexual feeling & nbsp;— an essential element in the early parts of the plot; the original publisher completely cut out a reference to the  " puppet masters "  later discovering human sexuality and embarking upon wild orgies, broadcast live on television in the areas under their control. 
 
 ==Reception== 
 Anthony Boucher|Boucher and J. Francis McComas|McComas characterized ''The Puppet Masters'' as  " a thunderously exciting melodrama of intrigue " , noting that Heinlein displayed  " not only his usual virtues of clear logic, rigorous detail-work, and mastery of indirect exposition " , but also unexpected virtues like  " a startling facility in suspense devices [and] a powerful ingenuity in plotting " .  " Recommended Reading, "  ''The Magazine of Fantasy  &  Science Fiction'', February 1952, p.105   P. Schuyler Miller, noting that the novel's  " climactic situations seem to be telegraphed " , suggested that Heinlein presented his background situations so effectively that readers solve the story's mysteries more quickly than Heinlein allowed his characters to.  " The Reference Library " , ''Astounding Science Fiction'', March 1952, pp.159   In his  " Books "  column for ''The Magazine of Fantasy  &  Science Fiction'', Damon Knight selected the novel as one of the 10 best science fiction|SF books of the 1950s.  " Books " , ''The Magazine of Fantasy  &  Science Fiction'', April 1960, p.99  
 
 The book was also reviewed in the 1951 Jun 15 issue of Kirkus Reviews.  The reviewer wrote, 
  The recurrent enigma of the flying saucer is finally solved when an aerial pieplate is caught with its exhaust down by the F.B.I. of 2007.  Hero Sam penetrates the contaminated area, brings a ‘master' back & nbsp;— a gelatinous gray mass which attaches itself to a soldier's body and controls his thought processes.  Sam and his girl spot further landings, plan a counter campaign and eventually are able to rid the solar system of its parasites.  Exciting, even if it exacts a strong stomach.  Found in the Kirkus Reviews archive at  Retrieved 2014 Oct 27   
 
 ==Publication history== 
 An extensive list of the novel's publications can be found on the Internet Speculative Fiction DataBase at   (Retrieved 2014 Oct 23) 
 
 == Adaptations == 
 ''The Brain Eaters'', a 1958 science fiction film directed by Bruno VeSota, bore a number of similarities to Heinlein's novel. Heinlein sued the film's producers, including Executive Producer Roger Corman, for plagiarism, asking $150,000 in damages. The case was settled out of court for $5,000,     which included Heinlein's stipulation that his name not be used on screen or in any way with the production. The case halted actor John Payne (actor)|John Payne's intention of producing a film based on Heinlein's novel. 
 
 The theme of the novel is echoed in  " The Invisibles (The Outer Limits)|The Invisibles " , an episode of ''The Outer Limits (1963 TV series)|The Outer Limits'' aired in 1964, and also in  " Operation: Annihilate! " , the last episode of the first season of ''Star Trek: The Original Series|Star Trek'' in 1967. Similarly, in the story line begun in the ''Star Trek: The Next Generation'' episode  " Coming of Age (Star Trek: The Next Generation)|Coming of Age "  and completed in  " Conspiracy (Star Trek: The Next Generation)|Conspiracy " , aliens from a faraway sector invade the bodies of high-ranking Starfleet admirals in an attempt to compromise the command structure and spearhead an invasion of Earth. 
 
 The novel was adapted, with some plot and character changes, into the 1994 The Puppet Masters (film)|film of the same name. The film followed the story rather closely, except for the setting changed to modern-day, thus losing most of the advanced technology, but it was not successful with either the critics or the public. 
 \ 
 == Influence == 
 
 Kenneth Von Gunden's novel  " Star Spawn "  Kenneth Von Gunden,  " Star Spawn " , Ace Books, New York, 1990,    takes up the basic premise of ''The Puppet Masters'' and transfers it to a Medieval setting.  Extraterrestrial parasites able to take over the bodies of humans and control them invade Medieval England and embark on conquering it, castle by castle - and are eventually foiled by the highly resourceful Friar Gregory and his friend  Sir Morrough the Knight. 
 
 The artist Sandy Stone (artist)|Allucquére Rosanne Sandy Stone has taken up the name ''Allucquére'' (not her birth name) from Heinlein's book. 
 
 ==References== 
  
 
 ==Sources== 
 * John Clute|Clute, John, and David Pringle.  " Heinlein, Robert A. "  The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. Eds. John Clute, David Langford, Peter Nicholls and Graham Sleight. Gollancz, 22 Oct. 2014. Web. 27 Oct. 2014.   . 
 * Holdstock, Robert, Ed., Encyclopedia of Science Fiction, London: Cathay Books, Pg. 109, , 1978. 
 * Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. pg. 215. . 
 * Bill Warren (film historian and critic)|Warren, Bill. ''Keep Watching the Skies: American Science Fiction Films of the Fifties'', 21st Century Edition. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland  &  Company, 2009. . 
 
 ==External links== 
 * 
 * 
 *''The Puppet Masters'' as serialized in ''Galaxy'' [ parts 1], [ 2], and [ 3] at the Internet Archive 
 
  
 
  
 Category:1951 American novels 
 Category:Alien invasions in novels 
 Category:American science fiction novels 
 Category:Novels by Robert A. Heinlein 
 Category:Novels first published in serial form 
 Category:1951 science fiction novels 
 Category:Fiction about Titan (moon) 
 Category:Works originally published in Galaxy Science Fiction 
 Category:Fiction about Trans-Neptunian objects 
 Category:American novels adapted into films 
 Category:Novels set in Iowa 
 Category:Fiction about mind control 
 Category:Doubleday (publisher) books 
 Category:Fiction set in 2007