 
  
  
  
 
  
 ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' () is an American children's literature|children's novel written by author L. Frank Baum and illustrated by W.W. Denslow, originally published by the George M. Hill Company in May 1900.     It has since seen several reprints, most often under the title ''The Wizard of Oz'', which is the title of the popular The Wizard of Oz (1902 musical)|1902 Broadway musical adaptation as well as the iconic The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)|1939 live-action film. 
 
 The story chronicles the adventures of a young farm girl named Dorothy Gale|Dorothy in the magical Land of Oz after she and her pet dog Toto (Oz)|Toto are swept away from their Kansas home by a tornado|cyclone. The book is one of the best-known stories in American literature and has been widely translated. The Library of Congress has declared it  " America's greatest and best-loved homegrown fairytale. "  Its groundbreaking success and the success of the Broadway musical adapted from the novel led Baum to write thirteen additional List of Oz books|Oz books that serve as official sequels to the first story. 
 
 In January 1901, George M. Hill Company completed printing the first edition, a total of 10,000 copies, which quickly sold out. It had sold three million copies by the time it entered the public domain in 1956. 
 File:The Wonderful Wizard of Oz Book Cover.jpg|thumb|1900 first edition cover, published by the George M. Hill Company, Chicago, New York 
 File:The Wonderful Wizard of Oz - W.W. Denslow cover (back).jpg|thumb|1900 edition original back cover 
 
 ==Publication== 
 L. Frank Baum's story was published by George M. Hill Company. The first edition had a printing of 10,000 copies and was sold in advance of the publication date of September 1, 1900. On May 17, 1900, the first copy came off the press; Baum assembled it by hand and presented it to his sister, Mary Louise Baum Brewster. The public saw it for the first time at a book fair at the Palmer House Hilton|the Palmer House in Chicago, July 5–20. Its copyright was registered on August 1; full distribution followed in September.  Katharine M. Rogers, ''L. Frank Baum,'' pp. 73–94.   By October 1900, it had already sold out and the second edition of 15,000 copies was nearly depleted.    
 
 In a letter to his brother, Harry, Baum wrote that the book's publisher, George M. Hill, predicted a sale of about 250,000 copies. In spite of this favorable conjecture, Hill did not initially predict that the book would be phenomenally successful. He agreed to publish the book only when the manager of the Chicago Grand Opera House, Fred R. Hamlin, committed to making it into a musical stage play to publicize the novel. The play ''The Wizard of Oz (1902 musical)|The Wizard of Oz'' debuted on June 16, 1902. It was revised to suit adult preferences and was crafted as a  " musical extravaganza, "  with the costumes modeled after Denslow's drawings. Hill's publishing company became bankrupt in 1901, so Baum and Denslow agreed to have the Indianapolis-based Bobbs-Merrill Company resume publishing the novel.    
 
 Baum's son, Harry Neal Baum|Harry Neal, told the ''Chicago Tribune'' in 1944 that Baum told his children  " whimsical stories before they became material for his books. "  Harry called his father the  " swellest man I knew, "  a man who was able to give a decent reason as to why Sing a Song of Sixpence|black birds cooked in a pie could afterwards get out and sing.    
 
 By 1938, more than one million copies of the book had been printed.     By 1956, the sales of it had grown to three million copies in print. 
 
 Baum dedicated the book  " to my good friend  &  comrade, My Wife " , Maud Gage Baum. 
 
 ==Plot== 
 Dorothy Gale|Dorothy is a young girl who lives with her Aunt Em, Uncle Henry (Oz)|Uncle Henry, and dog, Toto (Oz)|Toto, on a farm on the Kansas prairie. One day, she and Toto are caught up in a tornado|cyclone that deposits them and the farmhouse into Munchkin Country in the magical Land of Oz. The falling house has killed the Wicked Witch of the East, the evil ruler of the Munchkins. The Good Witch of the North arrives with three grateful Munchkins and gives Dorothy the magical Silver Shoes|silver shoes that once belonged to the Wicked Witch. The Good Witch tells Dorothy that the only way she can return home is to follow the yellow brick road to the Emerald City and ask the great and powerful Wizard of Oz (character)|Wizard of Oz to help her. As Dorothy embarks on her journey, the Good Witch of the North kisses her on the forehead, giving her magical protection from harm. 
 
 On her way down the yellow brick road, Dorothy attends a banquet held by a Munchkin named Boq. The next day, she frees a Scarecrow (Oz)|Scarecrow from the pole on which he is hanging, applies oil from a can to the rusted joints of a Tin Woodman, and meets a Cowardly Lion. The Scarecrow wants a brain, the Tin Woodman wants a heart, and the Lion wants courage, so Dorothy encourages them to journey with her and Toto to the Emerald City to ask for help from the Wizard. After several adventures, the travelers arrive at the Emerald City and meet the Guardian of the Gates, who asks them to wear green tinted spectacles to keep their eyes from being blinded by the city's brilliance. Each one is called to see the Wizard. He appears to Dorothy as a giant head, to the Scarecrow as a lovely lady, to the Tin Woodman as a terrible beast, and to the Lion as a ball of fire. He agrees to help them all if they kill the Wicked Witch of the West, who rules over Winkie Country. The Guardian warns them that no one has ever managed to defeat the witch. 
 
 The Wicked Witch of the West sees the travelers approaching with her one telescopic eye. She sends a pack of wolves to tear them to pieces, but the Tin Woodman kills them with his axe. She sends a flock of wild crows to peck their eyes out, but the Scarecrow kills them by twisting their necks. She summons a swarm of black bees to sting them, but they are killed while trying to sting the Tin Woodman while the Scarecrow's straw hides the others. She sends a dozen of her Winkie slaves to attack them, but the Lion stands firm to repel them. Finally, she uses the power of her Golden Cap to send the Winged Monkeys to capture Dorothy, Toto, and the Lion, unstuff the Scarecrow, and dent the Tin Woodman. Dorothy is forced to become the witch's personal slave, while the witch schemes to steal her silver shoes. 
 
 File:Wicked Witch2.jpg|right|thumb|250px|The Wicked Witch melts, from the W.W. Denslow illustration of the first edition (1900) 
 
 The witch successfully tricks Dorothy out of one of her silver shoes. Angered, she throws a bucket of water at the witch and is shocked to see her melt away. The Winkies rejoice at being freed from her tyranny and help restuff the Scarecrow and mend the Tin Woodman. They ask the Tin Woodman to become their ruler, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas. Dorothy finds the witch's Golden Cap and summons the Winged Monkeys to carry her and her friends back to the Emerald City. The King of the Winged Monkeys tells how he and his band are bound by an enchantment to the cap by the sorceress List of Oz characters (created by Baum)#Gayelette|Gayelette from the North, and that Dorothy may use it to summon them two more times. 
 
 When Dorothy and her friends meet the Wizard again, Toto tips over a screen in a corner of the throne room that reveals the Wizard, who sadly explains he is a humbug—an ordinary old man who, by a hot air balloon, came to Oz long ago from Omaha, Nebraska|Omaha. He provides the Scarecrow with a head full of bran, pins, and needles ( " a lot of bran-new brains " ), the Tin Woodman with a silk heart stuffed with sawdust, and the Lion a potion of  " courage " . Their faith in his power gives these items a focus for their desires. He decides to take Dorothy and Toto home and then go back to Omaha in his balloon. At the send-off, he appoints the Scarecrow to rule in his stead, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas. Toto chases a kitten in the crowd and Dorothy goes after him, but the ropes holding the balloon break and the Wizard floats away. 
 
 Dorothy summons the Winged Monkeys and tells them to carry her and Toto home, but they explain they can't cross the desert surrounding Oz. The Soldier with the Green Whiskers informs Dorothy that Glinda the Good Witch|Glinda, the Good Witch of the South may be able to help her return home, so the travelers begin their journey to see Glinda's castle in Quadling Country. On the way, the Lion kills a giant spider who is terrorizing the animals in a forest. They ask him to become their king, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas. Dorothy summons the Winged Monkeys a third time to fly them over a hill to Glinda's castle. Glinda greets them and reveals that Dorothy's silver shoes can take her anywhere she wishes to go. She embraces her friends, all of whom will be returned to their new kingdoms through Glinda's three uses of the Golden Cap: the Scarecrow to the Emerald City, the Tin Woodman to Winkie Country, and the Lion to the forest; after which the cap will be given to the King of the Winged Monkeys, freeing him and his band. Dorothy takes Toto in her arms, knocks her heels together three times, and wishes to return home. Instantly, she begins whirling through the air and rolling on the grass of the Kansas prairie, up to the farmhouse, though the silver shoes fall off her feet en route and are lost in the Deadly Desert. She runs to Aunt Em, saying  " I'm so glad to be home again! " 
 
 ==Illustration and design== 
 The book was illustrated by Baum's friend and collaborator W.W. Denslow, who also co-held the copyright. The design was lavish for the time, with illustrations on many pages, backgrounds in different colors, and several color plate illustrations. In September 1900, The ''Grand Rapids Herald'' wrote that Denslow's illustrations are  " quite as much of the story as in the writing " . The editorial opined that had it not been for Denslow's pictures, the readers would be unable to picture precisely the figures of Dorothy, Toto, and the other characters.    
 
 The distinctive look led to imitators at the time, most notably Eva Katherine Gibson's ''Zauberlinda, the Wise Witch'', which mimicked both the typography and the illustration design of ''Oz''.     The typeface was the newly designed Bookman (typeface)#Monotype version|Monotype Old Style. Denslow's illustrations were so well known that merchants of many products obtained permission to use them to promote their wares. The forms of the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman, the Cowardly Lion, the Wizard, and Dorothy were made into rubber and metal sculptures. Costume jewelry, mechanical toys, and soap were also designed using their figures.    
 
 A new edition of the book appeared in 1944, with illustrations by Evelyn Copelman.     Although it was claimed that the new illustrations were based on Denslow's originals, they more closely resemble the characters as seen in the famous The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)|1939 film version of Baum's book.  [ Children's Literature Research Collection | University of Minnesota Libraries]  
 
 ==Sources of images and ideas== 
 File:Cowardly lion2.jpg|right|thumb|250px|Dorothy meeting the Cowardly Lion, from the first edition 
 
 Baum acknowledged the influence of the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen, which he was deliberately revising in his  " American fairy tales "  to include the wonder without the horrors.      
 
 === Dorothy === 
 Jocelyn Burdick, former Democratic Party (United States)|Democratic U.S. Senator from North Dakota and daughter of Baum's niece, Magdalenda (Carpenter) Birch, has reported that her mother was likely the inspiration for Dorothy.  
 
 Baum spent  " considerable time at the Сarpenter homestead [...] and became very attached to Magdalena. "  Burdick has reported many similarities between her mother's homestead and the farm of Uncle Henry and Aunt Em.  |title=Eriksmoen: North Dakota girl was the likely inspiration for Dorothy in 'The Wizard of Oz'|url= Fargo Pioneer|language=en}}    
 
 Another story, which is better documented, is that the character was named after Baum's niece, who was also named Dorothy. She died in Bloomington, Illinois at the age of 5 months. She is buried at Evergreen Cemetery (Bloomington, Illinois) Her gravestone has a statue of the character Dorothy placed next to it.    
 
 ===The Land of Oz and other locations=== 
 Local legend has it that Oz, also known as the Emerald City, was inspired by a prominent castle-like building in the community of Castle Park near Holland, Michigan, where Baum lived during the summer. The yellow brick road was derived from a road at that time paved by yellow bricks, located in Peekskill, New York, where Baum attended the Peekskill Military Academy. Baum scholars often refer to the 1893 Chicago World's Fair (the  " White City " ) as an inspiration for the Emerald City. Other legends suggest that the inspiration came from the Hotel Del Coronado near San Diego, California. Baum was a frequent guest at the hotel and had written several of the Oz books there.  [ The Writer's Muse: L. Frank Baum and the Hotel del Coronado] .   In a 1903 interview with ''The Publishers' Weekly'',     Baum said that the name  " OZ "  came from his file cabinet labeled  " O–Z " .    
 
 Some critics have suggested that Baum may have been inspired by Australia, a relatively new country at the time of the book's original publication. Australia is often colloquially spelled or referred to as  " Oz " . Furthermore, in ''Ozma of Oz'' (1907), Dorothy gets back to Oz as the result of a storm at sea while she and Uncle Henry are traveling by ship to Australia. Like Australia, Oz is an island continent somewhere to the west of California with inhabited regions bordering on a great desert. One might imagine that Baum intended Oz to be Australia, or perhaps a magical land in the center of the great Australian desert.  Algeo, J.,  " Australia as the Land of Oz " , ''American Speech'', Vol. & nbsp;65, No. & nbsp;1, 1990, pp. & nbsp;86–89.  
 
 ===''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland''=== 
 Another influence lay in Lewis Carroll's ''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland''. A September 1900 review in the ''Grand Rapids Herald'' called ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' a  " veritable ''Alice in Wonderland'' brought up to the present day standard of juvenile literature " .   Baum found Carroll's plots incoherent, but he identified the books' source of popularity as Alice (Alice's Adventures in Wonderland)|Alice herself, a child with whom the child readers could identify; this influenced his choice of a protagonist.   Baum was also influenced by Carroll's belief that children's books should have many pictures and be pleasurable to read. Carroll rejected the Victorian-era ideology that children's books should be saturated with morals, instead believing that children should be allowed to be children. Building on Carroll's style of numerous images accompanying the text, Baum combined the conventional features of a fairy tale (witches and wizard (fantasy)|wizards) with the well-known things in his readers' lives (scarecrows and cornfields).    
 
 ===American fantasy story=== 
 ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' is considered by some to be the first American fairy tale because of its references to clear American locations such as Kansas and Omaha. Baum agreed with authors such as Carroll that fantasy literature was important for children, along with numerous illustrations, but he also wanted to create a story that had recognizable American elements in it, such as farming and industrialization.  Riley, Michael.  " Oz and Beyond, The Fantasy World of L. Frank Baum " . Lawrence, University of Kansas Press, 1997, p. 51.   While that sentiment is worthy, it overlooks several American fairy tales written by Washington Irving about the Catskill Mountains|Catskills region of New York State. Stories such as  " Rip Van Winkle " , published in 1819, and  " The Legend of Sleepy Hollow " , published in 1820, predate the Oz tales by several decades. 
 
 ===Baum's personal life=== 
 Many of the characters, props, and ideas in the novel were drawn from Baum's experiences. As a child, Baum frequently had nightmares of a scarecrow pursuing him across a field. Moments before the scarecrow's  " ragged hay fingers "  nearly gripped his neck, it would fall apart before his eyes. Decades later, as an adult, Baum integrated his tormentor into the novel as the Scarecrow.     According to his son Harry, the Tin Woodman was born from Baum's attraction to window displays. He wished to make something captivating for the window displays, so he used an eclectic assortment of scraps to craft a striking figure. From a washboiler he made a body, from bolted stovepipes he made arms and legs, and from the bottom of a saucepan he made a face. Baum then placed a funnel hat on the figure, which ultimately became the Tin Woodman.     John D. Rockefeller was the nemesis of Baum's father, an oil baron who declined to purchase Standard Oil shares in exchange for selling his own oil refinery.   Baum scholar Evan I. Schwartz posited that Rockefeller inspired one of the Wizard's numerous faces. In one scene in the novel, the Wizard is seen as a  " tyrannical, hairless head " . When Rockefeller was 54 years old, the medical condition alopecia caused him to lose every strand of hair on his head, making people fearful of speaking to him.    
 
 In the early 1880s, Baum's play ''Matches'' was being performed when a  " flicker from a kerosene lantern sparked the rafters " , causing the Baum opera house to be consumed by flames. Scholar Evan I. Schwartz suggested that this might have inspired the Scarecrow's severest terror:  " There is only one thing in the world I am afraid of. A lighted match. "    
 
 In 1890, Baum lived in Aberdeen, South Dakota|Aberdeen, Dakota Territory, which was experiencing a drought, and he wrote a witty story in his  " Our Landlady "  column in Aberdeen's ''The Saturday Pioneer''     about a farmer who gave green goggles to his horses, causing them to believe that the wood chips that they were eating were pieces of grass. Similarly, the Wizard made the people in the Emerald City wear green goggles so that they would believe that their city was built from emeralds.    
 
 During Baum's short stay in Aberdeen, the dissemination of myths about the plentiful West continued. However, the West, instead of being a wonderland, turned into a wasteland because of a drought and a depression. In 1891, Baum moved his family from South Dakota to Chicago. At that time, Chicago was getting ready for the World's Columbian Exposition in 1893. Scholar Laura Barrett stated that Chicago was  " considerably more akin to Oz than to Kansas " . After discovering that the myths about the West's incalculable riches were baseless, Baum created  " an extension of the American frontier in Oz " . In many respects, Baum's creation is similar to the actual frontier save for the fact that the West was still undeveloped at the time. The Munchkins Dorothy encounters at the beginning of the novel represent farmers, as do the Winkies she later meets.    
 
 Baum's wife frequently visited her niece, Dorothy Louise Gage. The infant became gravely sick and died on November 11, 1898, from  " congestion of the brain "  at exactly five months. When the baby, whom Maud adored as the daughter she never had, died, she was devastated and needed to consume medicine.     To assuage her distress, Frank made his protagonist of ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' a female named Dorothy.     Uncle Henry (Oz)|Uncle Henry was modeled after Henry Gage, his wife Maud Gage Baum|Maud's father. Bossed around by his wife Matilda Joslyn Gage|Matilda, Henry rarely dissented with her. He flourished in business, though, and his neighbors looked up to him. Likewise, Uncle Henry was a  " passive but hard-working man "  who  " looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke " .     The witches in the novel were influenced by witch-hunting research gathered by Baum's mother-in-law, Matilda. The stories of barbarous acts against accused witches scared Baum. Two key events in the novel involve wicked witches who both meet their death through metaphorical means.    
 
 Baum held different jobs, moved a lot, and was exposed to many people, so the inspiration for the story could have been taken from many different aspects of his life.  Schwartz, 2009, p. xiv.   In the introduction to the story, Baum writes that  " it aspires to being a modernized fairy tale, in which the wonderment and joy are retained and the heart-aches and nightmares are left out. "  Baum, Lyman Frank. ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz''. Harpers Collins, 2000, p. 5.   This is one of the explanations that he gives for the inspiration for ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz''. Baum, a former salesman of china, wrote in chapter 20 about china that had sprung to life.  
 
 ===Influence of Denslow=== 
 The original illustrator of the novel, W.W. Denslow, could also have influenced the story and the way it has been interpreted. Baum and Denslow had a close working relationship and worked together to create the presentation of the story through the images and the text. Color is an important element of the story and is present throughout the images, with each chapter having a different color representation. Denslow also added characteristics to his drawings that Baum never described. For example, Denslow drew a house and the gates of the Emerald City with faces on them. In the later Oz books, John R. Neill, who illustrated all of the sequels, continued to include these faces on gates.  Riley 1997, p. 42.   Another aspect is the Tin Woodman's funnel hat, which is not mentioned in the text until later books but appears in most artists' interpretation of the character, including the stage and film productions of 1902–09, 1908, 1910, 1914, 1925, 1931, 1933, 1939, 1982, 1985, 1988, 1992, and others. One of the earliest illustrators not to include a funnel hat was Russell H. Schulz in the 1957 Whitman Publishing edition—Schulz depicted him wearing a pot on his head. Libico Maraja's illustrations, which first appeared in a 1957 Italian edition and have also appeared in English-language and other editions, are well known for depicting him bareheaded. 
 
 ===Allusions to 19th-century America=== 
  
 Baum did not offer any conclusive proof that he intended his novel to be a political allegory, and for 60 years after the book's publication  " virtually nobody "  had such an interpretation. Then, in a 1964 ''American Quarterly'' article entitled  " The Wizard of Oz: Parable on Populism " ,     the American teacher Henry Littlefield posited that the book contained an allegory of the late 19th-century bimetallism debate regarding monetary policy.        Littlefield's thesis achieved some support, but has been strenuously attacked by others.  David B. Parker, [  " The Rise and Fall of ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' as a Parable on Populism " ] Journal of the Georgia Association of Historians, 15 (1994), pp. 49–63.   [ Setting the Standards on the Road to Oz, Mitch Sanders, The Numismatist, July 1991, pp 1042–1050]        " The Winning of the Midwest "  by Richard Jensen theorized that  " Oz "  was derived from the common abbreviation for  " ounce " , used for denoting quantities of gold and silver.    
 
 ==Cultural impact== 
 ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' has become an established part of multiple cultures, spreading from its early young American readership to becoming known throughout the world. It has been translated or adapted into well over fifty languages, at times being modified in local variations. For instance, in some abridged Indian editions, the Tin Woodman was replaced with a horse.     In Russia, a translation by Alexander Melentyevich Volkov produced six books, ''The Wizard of the Emerald City'' series, which became progressively distanced from the Baum version, as Ellie and her dog Totoshka travel throughout the Magic Land. The The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)|1939 film adaptation has become a classic of popular culture, shown annually on American television from 1959 to 1998 and then several times a year every year beginning in 1999.  [ ''To See The Wizard: Oz on Stage and Film''] . Library of Congress, 2003.   More recently, the story has become an The Wiz|American stage production with an all-black cast, set in the context of modern African-American culture.       
 
 There were several Hebrew translations published in Israel. As established in the first translation and kept in later ones, the book's ''Land of Oz'' was rendered in Hebrew as ''Eretz Uz'' (ארץ עוץ)—i.e. the same as the original Hebrew name of the Biblical ''Land of Uz'', homeland of Job (biblical figure)|Job. Thus, for Hebrew readers, this translators' choice added a layer of Biblical connotations absent from the English original. 
 
 ==Critical response== 
 The drawing as well as the introduced color work vies with the texts drawn, and the result has been a book that rises far above the average children's book of today, high as is the present standard....The book has a bright and joyous atmosphere, and does not dwell upon killing and deeds of violence. Enough stirring adventure enters into it, however, to flavor it with zest, and it will indeed be strange if there be a normal child who will not enjoy the story.|source = ''The New York Times'', September 8, 1900''    }} 
 
 ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' received positive critical reviews upon release. In a September 1900 review, ''The New York Times'' praised the novel, writing that it would appeal to child readers and to younger children who could not read yet. The review also praised the illustrations for being a pleasant complement to the text.  
 
 During the first 50 years after ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz''s publication in 1900, it received little critical analysis from scholars of children's literature. According to Ruth Berman of ''Science Fiction Studies'', the lists of suggested reading published for juvenile readers never contained Baum's work. The lack of interest stemmed from the scholars' misgivings about fantasy, as well as to their belief that lengthy series had little literary merit.    
 
 It has frequently come under fire over the years. In 1957, the director of Detroit's libraries banned ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' for having  " no value "  for children of his day, for supporting  " negativism " , and for bringing children's minds to a  " cowardly level " . Professor Russel B. Nye of Michigan State University countered that  " if the message of the Oz books—love, kindness, and unselfishness make the world a better place—seems of no value today " , then maybe the time is ripe for  " reassess[ing] a good many other things besides the Detroit library's approved list of children's books " .    
 
 In 1986, seven Fundamentalist Christian families in Tennessee opposed the novel's inclusion in the public school syllabus and filed a lawsuit.       
 They based their opposition to the novel on its depicting benevolent witches and promoting the belief that integral human attributes were  " individually developed rather than God given " .   One parent said,  " I do not want my children seduced into godless supernaturalism " .     Other reasons included the novel's teaching that females are equal to males and that animals are personified and can speak. The judge ruled that when the novel was being discussed in class, the parents were allowed to have their children leave the classroom.  
 
 Leonard Everett Fisher of ''The Horn Book Magazine'' wrote in 2000 that ''Oz'' has  " a timeless message from a less complex era, and it continues to resonate " . The challenge of valuing oneself during impending adversity has not, Fisher noted, lessened during the prior 100 years.    
 
 In a 2002 review, Bill Delaney of ''Salem Press'' praised Baum for giving children the opportunity to discover magic in the mundane things in their everyday lives. He further commended Baum for teaching  " millions of children to love reading during their crucial formative years " .  
 
 The Library of Congress has declared ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' to be  " America's greatest and best-loved homegrown fairytale " , also naming it the first American fantasy for children and one of the most-read children's books.    
 
 ==Editions== 
  
 After George M. Hill's bankruptcy in 1902, copyright in the book passed to the Bobbs-Merrill Company|Bowen-Merrill Company of Indianapolis, which published most of Baum's other books from 1901 to 1903 (''Father Goose, His Book'' (reprint), ''The Magical Monarch of Mo'' (reprint), ''American Fairy Tales'' (reprint), ''Dot and Tot of Merryland'' (reprint), ''The Master Key (novel)|The Master Key'', ''The Army Alphabet'', ''The Navy Alphabet'', ''The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus'', ''The Enchanted Island of Yew'', ''The Songs of Father Goose'') initially under the title   The New Wizard of Oz  . The word  " New "  was quickly dropped in subsequent printings, leaving the now-familiar shortened title,  " The Wizard of Oz, "  and some minor textual changes were added, such as to  " yellow daises, "  and changing a chapter title from  " The Rescue "  to  " How the Four Were Reunited. "  The editions they published lacked most of the in-text color and color plates of the original. Many cost-cutting measures were implemented, including removal of some of the color printing without replacing it with black, printing nothing rather than the beard of the Soldier with the Green Whiskers. When Baum filed for bankruptcy after his critically and popularly successful film and stage production ''The Fairylogue and Radio-Plays'' failed to make back its production costs, Baum lost the rights to all of the books published by what was now called Bobbs-Merrill, and they were licensed to the M.A. Donahue Company, which printed them in significantly cheaper  " blotting paper "  editions with advertising that directly competed with Baum's more recent books, published by the Reilly  &  Britton Company, from which he was making his living, explicitly hurting sales of ''The Patchwork Girl of Oz'', the new Oz book for 1913, to boost sales of ''Wizard'', which Donahue called in a full-page ad in ''The Publishers' Weekly'' (June 28, 1913), Baum's  " one pre-eminently great Juvenile Book. "  In a letter to Baum dated December 31, 1914, F.K. Reilly lamented that the average buyer employed by a retail store would not understand why he should be expected to spend 75 cents for a copy of ''Tik-Tok of Oz'' when he could buy a copy of ''Wizard'' for between 33 and 36 cents. Baum had previously written a letter complaining about the Donahue deal, which he did not know about until it was   fait accompli  , and one of the investors who held   The Wizard of Oz   rights had inquired why the royalty was only five or six cents per copy, depending on quantity sold, which made no sense to Baum.  Greene, David L.  " A Case of Insult. "  ''The Baum Bugle'' 16:1 (Spring 1974), 10-11. Citing letters in the L. Frank Baum Papers, Lilly Library, Indiana University.  
 
 A new edition from Bobbs-Merrill in 1949 illustrated by Evelyn Copelman, again titled ''The New Wizard of Oz'', paid lip service to Denslow but was based strongly, apart from the Lion, on the MGM movie. Copelman had illustrated a new edition of ''The Magical Monarch of Mo'' two years earlier.  William Stillman.  " The Lost Illustrator of Oz (and Mo). "  ''The Baum Bugle'', Vol. 40 No. 3 (Winter 1996).  
 
 It was not until the book entered the public domain in 1956 that new editions, either with the original color plates, or new illustrations, proliferated. A revised version of Copelman's artwork was published in a Grosset  &  Dunlap edition, and Reilly  &  Lee (formerly Reilly  &  Britton) published an edition in line with the Oz sequels, which had previously treated ''The Marvelous Land of Oz|The Land of Oz'' as the first Oz book,   See various photographs of promotional materials in David L. Greene and Dick Martin. ''The Oz Scrapbook''. 1976   not having the publication rights to ''Wizard'', with new illustrations by Dale Ulrey. Ulrey had previously illustrated Jack Snow (writer)|Jack Snow's ''Jaglon and the Tiger-Faries'', an expansion of a Baum short story,  " Animal Fairy Tales|The Story of Jaglon, "  and a 1955 edition of ''The Tin Woodman of Oz'', though both sold poorly. Later Reilly  &  Lee editions used Denslow's original illustrations.  
 
 Notable more recent editions are the 1986 Pennyroyal edition illustrated by Barry Moser, which was reprinted by the University of California Press, and the 2000 ''The Annotated Wizard of Oz'' edited by Michael Patrick Hearn (heavily revised from a 1972 edition that was printed in a wide format that allowed for it to be a facsimile of the original edition with notes and additional illustrations at the sides), which was published by W.W. Norton and included all the original color illustrations, as well as supplemental artwork by Denslow. Other centennial editions included University Press of Kansas's ''Kansas Centennial Edition'', illustrated by Michael McCurdy with black-and-white illustrations, and Robert Sabuda's pop-up book. 
 
 ==Sequels== 
  
 Baum wrote ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' without any thought of a sequel. After reading the novel, thousands of children wrote letters to him, requesting that he craft another story about Oz. In 1904, he wrote and published the first sequel, ''The Marvelous Land of Oz'', explaining that he grudgingly wrote the sequel to address the popular demand.     He dedicated the book to Montgomery  &  Stone and wrote large roles for the Scarecrow and Tin Woodman that he deleted from the stage version, ''The Woggle-Bug (musical)|The Woggle-Bug'', after the team balked at leaving a successful show to do a sequel. Baum also wrote sequels in 1907, 1908, and 1909. In his 1910 ''The Emerald City of Oz'', he wrote that he could not continue writing sequels because Ozland had lost contact with the rest of the world. The children refused to accept this story, so Baum, in 1913 and every year thereafter until his death in May 1919, wrote an ''Oz'' book, ultimately writing 13 sequels and half a dozen Oz short stories. The ''Chicago Tribune''s Russell MacFall wrote that Baum explained the purpose of his novels in a note he penned to his sister, Mary Louise Brewster, in a copy of ''Mother Goose in Prose'' (1897), his first book. He wrote,  " To please a child is a sweet and a lovely thing that warms one's heart and brings its own reward. "   After Baum's death in 1919, Baum's publishers delegated the creation of more sequels to Ruth Plumly Thompson who wrote 21.   An original ''Oz'' book was published every Christmas between 1913 and 1942.     By 1956, five million copies of the ''Oz'' books had been published in the English language, while hundreds of thousands had been published in eight foreign languages.  
 
 ==Adaptations== 
  
 File:Judy Garland in The Wizard of Oz trailer 2.jpg|thumb|right|Judy Garland as Dorothy Gale|Dorothy discovering that she and Toto are no longer in Kansas 
 
 ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' has been adapted to other media numerous times, most famously in ''The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)|The Wizard of Oz'', the 1939 film starring Judy Garland, Ray Bolger, Jack Haley, and Bert Lahr. Until this version, the book had inspired a number of now less well known stage and screen adaptations, including a profitable The Wizard of Oz (1902 stage play)|1902 Broadway musical and three silent films. The 1939 film was considered innovative because of its songs, special effects, and revolutionary use of the new Technicolor.    
 
 The story has been translated into other languages (at least once without permission, resulting in Alexander Volkov (writer)|Alexander Volkov's ''The Wizard of the Emerald City'' novel and its sequels, which were translated into English by Sergei Sukhinov) and adapted into comics several times. Following the lapse of the original copyright, the characters have been adapted and reused in spin-offs, unofficial sequels, and reinterpretations, some of which have been controversial in their treatment of Baum's characters. 
 
 ==Legacy== 
 In 2020, an Esperanto translation of the novel was used by a team of scientists to demonstrate a new method for encoding text in DNA which remains readable after repeated copying.    
 
 In 2018, [  " The Lost Art of Oz "  project] was initiated to locate and catalogue the surviving original artwork John R. Neill, W.W. Denslow, Frank Kramer, Richard 'Dirk' Gringhuis and Dick Martin created to illustrate the Oz book series.    
 
 ==See also== 
  
 * 1900 in literature 
 * The International Wizard of Oz Club 
 * ''The Baum Bugle'' 
 * ''Zardoz'' 
 * ''Wicked (musical)|Wicked'' 
 
 ==Notes and references== 
 ;Notes 
  
 
 ;Footnotes 
  
 
 ;Bibliography 
  
 
 *  
 * Aycock, Colleen and Mark Scott (2008). Joe Gans: A Biography of the First African American World Boxing Champion. McFarland  &  Co, 133–139. 
 *  
 * Frank Joslyn Baum|Baum, Frank Joslyn; MacFall, Russell P. (1961). ''To Please a Child''. Chicago: Reilly  &  Lee Co. 
 *  
 *  
 *  
 * Culver, Stuart.  " Growing Up in Oz. "  ''American Literary History'' 4 (1992) 607–28. 
 *  
 *  
 * Gardner, Martin; Nye, Russel B. (1994). ''The Wizard of Oz and Who He Was''. East Lansing: Michigan State University Press 
 * [ Gardner, Todd.  " Responses to Littlefield "  (2004), online] 
 *  
 * Greene, David L.; Martin, Dick (1977). ''The Oz Scrapbook''. Random House. 
 * Hanff, Peter E and Douglas G. Greene (1988). ''Bibliographia Oziana: A Concise Bibliographical Checklist.'' The International Wizard of Oz Club.  
 *  
 * Michael Patrick Hearn|Hearn, Michael Patrick (ed). (2000, 1973) ''The Annotated Wizard of Oz''. W. W. Norton  &  Co.  
 *  
 *  
 *  
 * [ Parker, David B. (1994)  " The Rise and Fall of ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' as a 'Parable on Populism'. "  ''Journal of the Georgia Association of Historians''. 16 (1994): 49–63] 
 * Riley, Michael O. (1997) ''Oz and Beyond: The Fantasy World of L. Frank Baum''. University of Kansas Press  
 * Ritter, Gretchen.  " Silver slippers and a golden cap: L. Frank Baum's ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' and historical memory in American politics. "  ''Journal of American Studies'' (August 1997) vol. 31, no. 2, 171–203. 
 * Rockoff, Hugh.  " The 'Wizard of Oz' as a Monetary Allegory, "  Journal of Political Economy 98 (1990): 739–60 online at JSTOR 
 *  
 *  
 * Sherman, Fraser A. (2005). ''The Wizard of Oz catalog: L. Frank Baum's novel, its sequels and their adaptations for stage, television, movies, radio, music videos, comic books, commercials and more''. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland  &  Co.  
 * Sunshine, Linda. ''All Things Oz'' (2003) 
 * Swartz, Mark Evan. ''Oz Before the Rainbow: L. Frank Baum's  " The Wonderful Wizard of Oz "  on Stage and Screen to 1939'' (2000). 
 *  
 * [ & d=5000776148 Velde, Francois R.  " Following the Yellow Brick Road: How the United States Adopted the Gold Standard "  Economic Perspectives. Volume: 26. Issue: 2. 2002.] [ also online here] 
 *  
 *  
  
 
 ==External links== 
  
  
  
  
 * Text: 
 **  
 ** [ ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'' (1900 illustrated copy)], Publisher's green and red illustrated cloth over boards; illustrated endpapers. Plate detached. Public Domain – Charles E. Young Research Library, University of California, Los Angeles|UCLA.  at Internet Archive 
 **[ & fileName=rbc0001_2006gen32405page.db & recNum=0 Online version of the 1900 first edition] on the Library of Congress website. 
 * Audio: 
 **  
 ** [ ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz by L. Frank Baum''], an unabridged dramatic audio performance at Wired for Books. 
 *  
 *[ A Long and Dangerous Journey – A History of ''The Wizard of Oz'' on the Silver Screen] – Scream-It-Loud.com 
 *  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 Category:1900 American novels 
 Category:1900 children's books 
 Category:1900 fantasy novels 
 Category:American fantasy novels adapted into films 
 Category:Wizards in fiction 
 Category:American novels adapted into films 
 Category:American novels adapted into plays 
 Category:Books about lions 
 Category:Novels about orphans 
 Category:Novels adapted into comics 
 Category:Novels adapted into radio programs 
 Category:American novels adapted into television shows 
 Category:Novels adapted into video games 
 Category:Novels set in Kansas 
 Category:Oz (franchise) books 
 Category:Novels set in fictional countries