 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 | publisher    = Allen  &  Unwin 
 | pub_date     =  
 | media_type   = Print (hardback  &  paperback) 
 | oclc         = 1487587 
 | preceded_by  = The Hobbit 
 | followed_by  = The Adventures of Tom Bombadil 
 }} 
 ''The Lord of the Rings'' is an Epic (genre)|epic     high fantasy novel by the English author and scholar J. R. R. Tolkien. Set in Middle-earth, the world at some distant time in the past, the story began as a sequel to Tolkien's 1937 children's book ''The Hobbit'', but eventually developed into a much larger work. Written in stages between 1937 and 1949, ''The Lord of the Rings'' is one of the List of best-selling books|best-selling books ever written  , with over 150 million copies sold.    
 
 The title names the story's main antagonist, the Dark Lord Sauron, who had in an earlier age created the One Ring to rule the other Rings of Power as the ultimate weapon in his campaign to conquer and rule all of Middle-earth. From homely beginnings in the Shire, a hobbit land reminiscent of the English countryside, the story ranges across Middle-earth, following the quest mainly through the eyes of the hobbits Frodo Baggins|Frodo, Samwise Gamgee|Sam, Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry and Peregrin Took|Pippin. 
 
 Although generally known to readers as a trilogy, the work was initially intended by Tolkien to be one volume of a two-volume set along with ''The Silmarillion'', but this idea was dismissed by his publisher.     , letter #126 to Milton Waldman (draft), 10 March 1950   For economic reasons, ''The Lord of the Rings'' was published in three volumes over the course of a year from 29 July 1954 to 20 October 1955.      The three volumes were titled ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', ''The Two Towers'' and ''The Return of the King''. Structurally, the work is divided internally into six books, two per volume, with several appendices of background material at the end. Some editions print the entire work into a single volume, following the author's original intent. 
 
 Tolkien's work, after an initially mixed Reception of J. R. R. Tolkien|reception by the literary establishment, has been the subject of Themes of The Lord of the Rings|extensive analysis of its themes and origins. Tolkien's influences|Influences on this earlier work, and on the story of ''The Lord of the Rings'', include philology, mythology, religion, earlier fantasy works, and J. R. R. Tolkien#First World War|his own experiences in the First World War. ''The Lord of the Rings'' in its turn has had a great effect on modern fantasy. 
 
 ''The Lord of the Rings'' has since been reprinted many times and translations of The Lord of the Rings|translated into at least 38 languages. The enduring popularity of ''The Lord of the Rings'' has led to numerous references in popular culture, the founding of many societies by Tolkien fandom|fans of Tolkien's works,     and the publication of many books about Tolkien and his works. It has Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien|inspired numerous derivative works including artwork, music, films and television, Middle-earth in video games|video games, board games, and subsequent literature. Award-winning Adaptations of The Lord of the Rings|adaptations of ''The Lord of the Rings'' have been made for The Lord of the Rings (1981 radio series)|radio, Lord of the Rings (musical)|theatre, and The Lord of the Rings (film series)|film. It has been named Britain's best novel of all time in the BBC's The Big Read. 
 
  
 
 ==Plot== 
  
 
 ===''The Fellowship of the Ring''=== 
 
 ====Prologue==== 
 
 The prologue explains that the book is  " largely concerned with hobbits " , and tells of their origins in a migration from the east; of how they smoke  " pipe-weed " ; of how the Shire, where most of them live, is organised; and how the narrative follows on from ''The Hobbit'', in which the hobbit Bilbo Baggins finds One Ring|the Ring, which had been in the possession of the creature Gollum.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'',  " Prologue "  
 
 ====Book One==== 
 File:One Ring Blender Render.png|thumb|upright=0.6|Gandalf proves that Frodo Baggins|Frodo's Ring is the One Ring by throwing it into Frodo's fireplace: the hidden text of the Rhyme of the Rings is displayed.   
 
 Bilbo celebrates his 111th birthday and leaves the Shire, leaving the Ring to Frodo Baggins, his cousin  Although Frodo refers to Bilbo as his  " uncle " , the character is introduced in  " A Long-expected Party "  as one of Bilbo's younger cousins. The two were in fact first ''and'' second cousins, once removed either way (his paternal great-great-uncle's son's son and his maternal great-aunt's son).   and heir.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 1,  " A Long-expected Party "   Neither hobbit is aware of the Ring's nature, but the Wizard (Middle-earth)|wizard Gandalf realises that it is a Rings of Power|Ring of Power. Seventeen years later, Gandalf tells Frodo that he has confirmed that the Ring is the one lost by the Dark Lord Sauron long ago and counsels him to take it away from the Shire.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 2,  " The Shadow of the Past "   Gandalf leaves, promising to return by Frodo's birthday and accompany him on his journey, but fails to do so. Frodo sets out on foot, ostensibly moving to his new home in Crickhollow, accompanied by his gardener, Samwise Gamgee|Sam Gamgee, and his cousin, Pippin Took. They are pursued by mysterious Nazgûl|Black Riders, but meet a passing group of Elves (Middle-Earth)|Elves and spend the night with them.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 3,  " Three is Company "   The next day they take a short cut to avoid the Riders, and arrive at the farm of Farmer Maggot. He takes them to Bucklebury Ferry, where they meet their friend Merry Brandybuck who was looking for them.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 4,  " A Short Cut to Mushrooms "   When they reach the house at Crickhollow, Merry and Pippin reveal they know about the Ring and insist on travelling with Frodo and Sam.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 5,  " A Conspiracy Unmasked "   They decide to shake off the Black Riders by cutting through the Old Forest. Merry and Pippin are trapped by Old Man Willow, an evil tree who controls much of the forest, but are rescued by the mysterious Tom Bombadil.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 6,  " The Old Forest "   ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 7,  " In the House of Tom Bombadil "   Leaving, they are caught by a barrow-wight, who traps them in a Barrow (archaeology)|barrow on the downs. Frodo, awakening from the barrow-wight's spell, manages to call Bombadil, who frees them, and equips them with ancient swords from the barrow-wight's hoard.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 8,  " Fog on the Barrow-downs "  
 
 The hobbits reach the village of Bree (Middle-earth)|Bree, where they encounter a Ranger of the North|Ranger named Aragorn|Strider. The innkeeper gives Frodo a letter from Gandalf written three months before which identifies Strider as a friend. Strider leads the hobbits into the wilderness after another close escape from the Black Riders, who they now know to be the Nazgûl, who are Ringwraiths, servants of Sauron.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 10,  " Strider "   On the hill of Weathertop, they are again attacked by the Nazgûl, who wound Frodo with a cursed blade.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 11,  " A Knife in the Dark "   Strider fights them off and leads the hobbits towards the Elf (Middle-earth)|Elven refuge of Rivendell. Frodo falls deathly ill; Strider finds the only herb, Athelas, that can save him, and treats him with it, yet he is not fully recovered. The Nazgûl nearly capture Frodo at the Ford of Bruinen, but Magic in Middle-earth|flood waters summoned by Elrond, master of Rivendell, rise up and overwhelm them.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 1, ch. 12,  " Flight to the Ford "  
 
 ====Book Two==== 
  
 Frodo recovers in Rivendell under Elrond's care.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 1,  " Many Meetings "   The Council of Elrond discusses the history of Sauron and the Ring. Strider is revealed to be Aragorn, the heir of Isildur who cut the Ring from Sauron's hand, but failed to destroy it. Gandalf reports that the chief wizard Saruman has betrayed them and is now working to become a Sauron-like power in his own right. Gandalf was captured by Saruman and had to escape, explaining why he had failed to return to meet Frodo as he had promised. The Council decides that the Ring must be destroyed, but that can only be done by sending it to the fire of Mount Doom in Mordor, where it was forged. Frodo takes this task upon himself.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 2,  " The Council of Elrond "   Elrond, with the advice of Gandalf, chooses companions for him. The Fellowship of the Ring (characters)|Fellowship of the Ring consists of nine walkers to oppose the nine Black Riders: Frodo, Sam, Merry, Pippin, Aragorn, Gandalf, Gimli (Middle-earth)|Gimli the Dwarf (Middle-earth)|Dwarf, Legolas the Elf (Middle-earth)|Elf, and the Man Boromir, son of Denethor, the Stewards of Gondor|Steward of Gondor.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 3,  " The Ring Goes South "  
 
 After a failed attempt to cross the Misty Mountains over the Redhorn Pass, the Fellowship take the perilous path through the Moria (Middle-earth)|Mines of Moria. They learn that Balin (Middle-earth)|Balin, one of the Dwarves who accompanied Bilbo in ''The Hobbit'', and his colony of Dwarves were killed by Orc (Middle-earth)|Orcs.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 4,  " A Journey in the Dark "   After surviving an attack, they are pursued by Orcs and by a Balrog, an ancient fire demon. Gandalf faces the Balrog, and both of them fall into the abyss.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 5,  " The Bridge of Khazad-Dum "   The others escape and find refuge in the Elven forest of Lothlórien,  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 6,  " Lothlórien "   where they are counselled by the Lady Galadriel. Before they leave, Galadriel silently tests their loyalty, and gives them individual, more or less magical, gifts to help them on their quest. She allows Frodo and Sam to look into her fountain, the Mirror of Galadriel, to see visions of past, present, and perhaps future.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 7,  " The Mirror of Galadriel "  
 
 The elf-lord Celeborn gives the Fellowship boats, elven cloaks, and waybread, and they travel down the River Anduin to the hill of Amon Hen.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 8,  " Farewell to Lórien "   ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 9,  " The Great River "   There, Boromir tries to take the Ring from Frodo, but Frodo puts it on and disappears. Frodo chooses to go alone to Mordor, but Sam guesses what he intends, intercepts him as he tries to take a boat across the river, and goes with him.  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 10,  " The Breaking of the Fellowship "  
 
 ===''The Two Towers''=== 
 
 ====Book Three==== 
 Large Orcs, Uruk-hai, sent by Saruman and other Orcs sent by Sauron kill Boromir and capture Merry and Pippin.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 1  " The Departure of Boromir "   Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas decide to pursue the Orcs taking Merry and Pippin to Saruman.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 3  " The Uruk-hai "   In the kingdom of Rohan (Middle-earth)|Rohan, the Orcs are killed by Rohan (Middle-earth)#People|Riders of Rohan, led by Éomer.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 2  " The Riders of Rohan "   Merry and Pippin escape into Fangorn Forest, where they are befriended by Treebeard, the oldest of the tree-like Ents.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 4  " Treebeard "   Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas track the hobbits to Fangorn. There they unexpectedly meet Gandalf.  
 
 Gandalf explains that he killed the Balrog. He was killed in the fight, but was sent back to Middle-earth to complete his mission. He is clothed in white and is now Gandalf the White, for he has taken Saruman's place as the chief of the wizards. Gandalf assures his friends that Merry and Pippin are safe.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 5,  " The White Rider "   Together they ride to Edoras, capital of Rohan. Gandalf frees Théoden, King of Rohan, from the influence of Saruman's spy Gríma Wormtongue. Théoden musters his fighting strength and rides with his men to the ancient fortress of Helm's Deep, while Gandalf departs to seek help from Treebeard.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 6  " The King of the Golden Hall "  
 
 Meanwhile, the Ents, roused by Merry and Pippin from their peaceful ways, attack and destroy Isengard, Saruman's stronghold, and flood it, trapping the wizard in the tower of Orthanc.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 9  " Flotsam and Jetsam "   Gandalf convinces Treebeard to send an army of Huorns to Théoden's aid. He brings an army of Rohirrim to Helm's Deep, and they defeat the Orcs, who flee into the forest of Huorns, never to be seen again.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 7  " Helm's Deep "   Gandalf, Theoden, Legolas, and Gimli ride to Isengard, and are surprised to find Merry and Pippin relaxing amidst the ruins.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 8  " The Road to Isengard "   Gandalf offers Saruman a chance to turn away from evil. When Saruman refuses to listen, Gandalf strips him of his rank and most of his powers.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 10,  " The Voice of Saruman "   After Saruman crawls back to his prison, Wormtongue throws down a hard round object to try to kill Gandalf. Pippin picks it up; Gandalf swiftly takes it, but Pippin steals it in the night. It is revealed to be a ''palantír'', a seeing-stone that Saruman used to speak with Sauron, and that Sauron used to ensnare him. Pippin is seen by Sauron. Gandalf rides for Minas Tirith, chief city of Gondor, taking Pippin with him.  ''The Two Towers'', book 3, ch. 11,  " The Palantír "  
 
 ====Book Four==== 
 Frodo and Sam, heading for Mordor, struggle through the barren hills and cliffs of the Emyn Muil. They become aware they are being watched and tracked; on a moonlit night they capture Gollum, who has followed them from Moria. Frodo makes Gollum swear to serve him, as Ringbearer, and asks him to guide them to Mordor.  ''The Two Towers'', book 4, ch. 1,  " The Taming of Sméagol "   Gollum leads them across the Dead Marshes. Sam overhears Gollum debating with his alter ego, Sméagol, whether to break his promise and steal the Ring.  ''The Two Towers'', book 4, ch. 2,  " The Passage of the Marshes "   They find that the Black Gate (Middle-earth)|Black Gate of Mordor is too well guarded, so instead they travel south through the land of Ithilien to a secret pass that Gollum knows.  ''The Two Towers'', book 4, ch. 3,  " The Black Gate is Closed "   ''The Two Towers'', book 4, ch. 4,  " Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit "   On the way, they are captured by Faramir, brother of Boromir, and his rangers. He resists the temptation to seize the Ring.  ''The Two Towers'', book 4, ch. 5,  " The Window on the West "   Gollum–who is torn between his loyalty to Frodo and his desire for the Ring–leads the hobbits to the pass,  ''The Two Towers'', book 4, ch. 6,  " The Forbidden Pool "   ''The Two Towers'', book 4, ch. 7,  " Journey to the Cross-Roads "   but betrays Frodo to the great spider Shelob in the tunnels of Cirith Ungol.  ''The Two Towers'', book 4, ch. 8,  " The Stairs of Cirith Ungol "   Gollum leads them into Shelob's lair. Frodo holds up the Phial of the Christianity in Middle-earth#Light|light of Elbereth's star given to him by Galadriel. The light blinds Shelob, and she backs down. Frodo manages to cut through a giant web using Sting (sword)|Sting, and they advance. Shelob attacks from another tunnel, and Frodo falls to her sting.  ''The Two Towers'', book 4, ch. 9,  " Shelob's Lair "   With the help of the Phial of Galadriel and the sword Sting, Sam fights off and seriously wounds the monster. Believing Frodo to be dead, Sam takes the Ring to continue the quest alone. Orcs find Frodo; Sam overhears them and realises that Frodo is still alive.  ''The Two Towers'', book 4, ch. 10,  " The Choices of Master Samwise "  
 
 ===''The Return of the King''=== 
 
 ====Book Five==== 
 Sauron sends a great army against Gondor. Gandalf arrives at Minas Tirith to warn Denethor of the attack,  ''The Return of the King'', book 5, ch. 1  " Minas Tirith "   while Théoden musters the Rohirrim to ride to Gondor's aid.   Minas Tirith is besieged; the Lord of the Nazgûl uses a battering-ram and the power of his Ring to destroy the city's gates.  ''The Return of the King'', book 5, ch. 4  " The Siege of Gondor "   Denethor, deceived by Sauron, falls into despair. He burns himself alive on a pyre, nearly taking his son Faramir with him.  ''The Return of the King'', book 5, ch. 7  " The Pyre of Denethor "   Aragorn, accompanied by Legolas, Gimli, and the Rangers of the North, takes the Paths of the Dead to recruit the Dead Men of Dunharrow, who are bound by a curse which denies them rest until they fulfil their ancient oath to fight for the King of Gondor.  ''The Return of the King'', book 5, ch. 2  " The Passing of the Grey Company "  
 
 Following Aragorn, the Army of the Dead strikes terror into the Corsairs of Umbar invading southern Gondor. Aragorn defeats the Corsairs and uses their ships to transport the men of southern Gondor up the Anduin,   reaching Minas Tirith just in time to turn the tide of battle.  ''The Return of the King'', book 5, ch. 5  " The Ride of the Rohirrim "   Théoden's niece Éowyn, who joined the army in disguise,  ''The Return of the King'', book 5, ch. 3  " The Muster of Rohan "   kills the Lord of the Nazgûl with help from Merry; both are wounded. Together, Gondor and Rohan defeat Sauron's army in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, though at great cost; King Théoden is among the dead.  ''The Return of the King'', book 5, ch. 6  " The Battle of the Pelennor Fields "  
 
 Aragorn enters Minas Tirith and heals Faramir, Eowyn, and Merry.  ''The Return of the King'', Book 5, Chapter 8,  " The Houses of Healing "   He leads an army of men from Gondor and Rohan, marching through Ithilien to the Black Gate to distract Sauron from his true danger.  ''The Return of the King,'' book 5, ch. 9  " The Last Debate " .   His army for the Battle of the Morannon is vastly outnumbered by the great might of Mordor as Sauron attacks with overwhelming force.  ''The Return of the King'', book 5, ch. 10  " The Black Gate Opens "  
 
 ====Book Six==== 
 Meanwhile, Sam rescues Frodo from the tower of Cirith Ungol.  ''The Return of the King'', book 6, ch. 1,  " The Tower of Cirith Ungol "   They set out across Mordor.  ''The Return of the King'', book 6, ch. 2,  " The Land of Shadow "   When they reach the edge of the Cracks of Doom, Frodo cannot resist the Ring any longer. He claims it for himself and puts it on his finger.  ''The Return of the King'', book 6, ch. 3,  " Mount Doom "   Gollum suddenly reappears. He struggles with Frodo and bites off Frodo's finger with the Ring still on it. Celebrating wildly, Gollum loses his footing and falls into the Fire, taking the Ring with him.   When the Ring is destroyed, Sauron loses his power forever. All he created collapses, the Nazgûl perish, and his armies are thrown into such disarray that Aragorn's forces emerge victorious.  ''The Return of the King'', book 6, ch. 4  " The Field of Cormallen "  
 
 Aragorn is crowned King of Arnor and Gondor, and weds Arwen, daughter of Elrond.  ''The Return of the King'', book 6, ch. 5  " The Steward and the King "    
 Théoden is buried and Éomer is crowned King of Rohan. His sister Éowyn is engaged to marry Faramir, now Steward of Gondor and Prince of Ithilien. Galadriel, Celeborn, and Gandalf meet and say farewell to Treebeard, and to Aragorn.  ''The Return of the King'', book 6, ch. 6,  " Many Partings "  
 
 The four hobbits make their way back to the Shire,  ''The Return of the King'', book 6, ch. 7,  " Homeward Bound "   only to find that it has been taken over by men directed by  " Sharkey "  (whom they later discover to be Saruman). The hobbits, led by Merry, raise a rebellion and The Scouring of the Shire|scour the Shire of Sharkey's evil. Gríma Wormtongue turns on Saruman and kills him in front of Bag End, Frodo's home. He is killed in turn by hobbit archers.  ''The Return of the King'', book 6, ch. 8,  " The Scouring of the Shire "   Merry and Pippin are celebrated as heroes. Sam marries Rosie Cotton and uses his gifts from Galadriel to help heal the Shire. But Frodo is still wounded in body and spirit, having borne the Ring for so long. A few years later, in the company of Bilbo and Gandalf, Frodo sails from the Grey Havens west over the Sea to the Undying Lands to find peace.  ''The Return of the King'', book 6, ch. 9,  " The Grey Havens "  
 
 ====Appendices==== 
 
 " The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen "  tells how it happened, as told in the main story, that an immortal elf came to marry a man, as Arwen's ancestor Lúthien had done in the First Age, giving up her immortality.  ''The Return of the King'', Appendix A:  " Annals of the Kings and Rulers " : 1  " The Númenórean Kings "  (v)  " Here follows a part of the Tale of Aragorn and Arwen "  
 It is told, too, that Sam gives his daughter Elanor the ''Red Book of Westmarch'', which contains the story of Bilbo's adventures and the War of the Ring as witnessed by the hobbits. It is said there was a tradition that Sam crossed west over the Sea himself, the last of the Ring-bearers; and that some years later, after the deaths of Aragorn and Arwen, Legolas and Gimli too sailed  " over Sea " .  ''The Return of the King'' Appendix B  " The Tale of Years " ,  " Later events concerning the members of the fellowship of the Ring "  
 
 ===Frame-story=== 
 
 Tolkien presents ''The Lord of the Rings'' within a fictional frame story where he is not the original author, but merely the translator of part of an ancient document, the ''Red Book of Westmarch''.     That book is modelled on the real ''Red Book of Hergest'', which similarly presents an older mythology. Various details of the frame story appear in the Prologue, its  " Note on The Shire|Shire Records " , and in the Appendices, notably Appendix F. In this frame story, the ''Red Book'' is the purported source of Tolkien's other works relating to Middle-earth: ''The Hobbit'', ''The Silmarillion'', and ''The Adventures of Tom Bombadil''.    
 
 ==Concept and creation== 
 
 ===Background=== 
 
 Although a major work in itself, ''The Lord of the Rings'' was only the last movement of a much older set of narratives Tolkien had worked on since 1917 encompassing ''The Silmarillion'',     in a process he described as ''mythopoeia''.  |group=lower-alpha}} 
 
 ''The Lord of the Rings'' started as a sequel to Tolkien's work ''The Hobbit,'' published in 1937.     The popularity of ''The Hobbit'' had led George Allen  &  Unwin, the publishers, to request a sequel. Tolkien warned them that he wrote quite slowly, and responded with several stories he had already developed. Having rejected his contemporary drafts for ''The Silmarillion'', putting ''Roverandom'' on hold, and accepting ''Farmer Giles of Ham'', Allen  &  Unwin continued to ask for more stories about hobbits. 
 
 ===Writing=== 
 Persuaded by his publishers, he started  " a new Hobbit "  in December 1937.   After several false starts, the story of the One Ring emerged. The idea for the first chapter ( " A Long-Expected Party " ) arrived fully formed, although the reasons behind Bilbo's disappearance, the significance of the Ring, and the title ''The Lord of the Rings'' did not arrive until the spring of 1938.   Originally, he planned to write a story in which Bilbo had used up all his treasure and was looking for another adventure to gain more; however, he remembered the Ring and its powers and thought that would be a better focus for the new work.   As the story progressed, he brought in elements from ''The Silmarillion'' mythology.    
 
 Writing was slow, because Tolkien had a full-time academic position, marked exams to bring in a little extra income, and wrote many drafts.   , letter #17 to Stanley Unwin (publisher)|Stanley Unwin, 15 October 1937   Tolkien abandoned ''The Lord of the Rings'' during most of 1943 and only restarted it in April 1944,   as a serial for his son Christopher Tolkien, who was sent chapters as they were written while he was serving in South Africa with the Royal Air Force. Tolkien made another major effort in 1946, and showed the manuscript to his publishers in 1947.   The story was effectively finished the next year, but Tolkien did not complete the revision of earlier parts of the work until 1949.   The original manuscripts, which total 9,250 pages, now reside in the J. R. R. Tolkien Collection at Marquette University.   Marquette Archives  Raynor Memorial Libraries  Marquette University |url-status=live |archive-url= |archive-date=19 December 2013 }}  
 
 ===Poetry=== 
  
 
 Unusually for 20th century novels, the prose narrative is Poetry in The Lord of the Rings|supplemented throughout by over 60 pieces of poetry. These include verse and songs of many genres: for wandering, Marching song|marching to war, Drinking song|drinking, and having a bath; narrating ancient myths, riddles, Prophecy|prophecies, and magical incantations; and of praise and lament (elegy).   Some, such as riddles, charms, elegies, and narrating heroic actions are found in Old English poetry.     Scholars have stated that the poetry is essential for the fiction to work aesthetically and thematically, as it adds information not given in the prose, and it brings out characters and their backgrounds.        The poetry has been judged to be of high technical skill, reflected in his prose; for instance, he wrote much of Tom Bombadil's speech in metre.    
 
 ===Illustrations=== 
  
 File:One Ring inscription.svg|thumb|right|upright=1.5|Tolkien's calligraphy of the Rhyme of the Rings was one of the few illustrations in the first edition. 
 
 Tolkien worked on the text using Tolkien's maps|his maps of Middle-earth as a guide, to ensure the elements of the story fitted together in time and space.     He prepared a variety of types of illustration – maps, calligraphy, drawings, cover designs, even a facsimile painting of the Book of Mazarbul – but only the maps, the inscription on the Ring,   and a drawing of the Doors of Durin  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'', book 2, ch. 4  " A Journey in the Dark "   were included in the first edition.     ''Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien|Letters'' #141 to Allen  &  Unwin, 9 October 1953}}  
 
 The hardback editions sometimes had cover illustrations by Tolkien, sometimes by other artists.   According to ''The New York Times'', Barbara Remington's cover designs for Ballantine Books|Ballantine's paperback editions  " achieved mass-cult status in the 1960s, particularly on college campuses "   across America. In the rush to print, Remington had no time to read the book, and surprised Tolkien with details such as a tree with pumpkin-like fruits, and a lion, which was painted out for later editions.    
 
 ===Influences=== 
  
 File:Beowulf eotenas ylfe orcneas.jpg|thumb|upright=2|right|''Beowulf''s ''eotenas [ond] ylfe [ond] orcneas'',  " ogres [and] elves [and] devil-corpses "  helped to inspire Tolkien to create the Orcs and Elf (Middle-earth)|Elves of Middle-earth.   
 
 Tolkien drew on J. R. R. Tolkien's influences|a wide array of influences including language,     Christianity,  , letter #142 to Robert Murray, S. J., 2 December 1953   mythology including the Norse ''Völsunga saga'',     archaeology, especially at the Temple of Nodens,     ancient and modern literature, and personal experience. He was inspired primarily by his profession, philology;  , letter #165 to Houghton Mifflin, 30 June 1955   his work centred on the study of Old English literature, especially ''Beowulf'', and he acknowledged its importance to his writings.      
 He was a gifted linguist, influenced by Celtic,      Finnish,     Slavic,     and Greek language and mythology.      
 Commentators have attempted to identify literary and topological antecedents for characters, places and events in Tolkien's writings; he acknowledged that he had enjoyed adventure stories by authors such as John Buchan and Rider Haggard.           The Arts and Crafts polymath William Morris was a major influence,  , letter #19 to Stanley Unwin, 31 December 1960   and Tolkien undoubtedly made use of some real place-names, such as Bag End, the name of his aunt's home.    
 Tolkien stated, too, that he had been influenced by his childhood experiences of the English countryside of Worcestershire near Sarehole Mill, and its urbanisation by the growth of Birmingham,  , letter #178 to Allen  &  Unwin, 12 December 1955, and #303 to Nicholas Thomas, 6 May 1968   and his personal experience of Trench warfare|fighting in the trenches of the First World War.    
 
 ===Themes=== 
  
 
 Scholars and critics have identified Themes of The Lord of the Rings|many themes in the book, including a reversed quest,        the struggle of good and evil,     The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen#Love and death|death and immortality,     fate and free will,     Addiction to power in The Lord of the Rings|the addictive danger of power,     and various aspects of Christianity such as the presence of three Christ figures, for prophet, priest, and king, as well as elements like hope and redemptive suffering.               
 There is a common theme throughout the work of Languages constructed by J. R. R. Tolkien#The Lord of the Rings|language, its sound, and its relationship to peoples and places, along with hints of divine providence|providence in descriptions of weather and landscape.     Out of these, Tolkien stated that the central theme is death and immortality.  , letter #211 to Rhona Beare, 14 October 1958   To those who supposed that the book was an allegory of events in the 20th century, Tolkien replied in the Foreword to the Second Edition that it was not, saying he preferred  " history, true or feigned, with its varied applicability to the thought and experience of readers. "  ''The Fellowship of the Ring'',  " Foreword to the Second Edition "  
 
 Some commentators have accused the book of being a story about men for boys, with no significant women; or about a purely rural world with no bearing on modern life in cities; of containing no sign of religion; or of racism. All of these charges have been rebutted by other commentators, who note that there are three Women in The Lord of the Rings|powerful women in the book, Galadriel, Éowyn, and Arwen; that life, even in rural Hobbiton, is not idealised; that Christianity in Middle-earth|Christianity is a pervasive theme; and that Tolkien and race|Tolkien was sharply anti-racist both in peacetime and during the Second World War, while Middle-earth is evidently polycultural.          
 
 ==Publication history== 
 
 A dispute with his publisher, Allen  &  Unwin|George Allen  &  Unwin, led to his offering the work to William Collins, Sons|William Collins in 1950. Tolkien intended ''The Silmarillion'' (itself largely unrevised at this point) to be published along with ''The Lord of the Rings,'' but Allen  &  Unwin were unwilling to do this. After Milton Waldman, his contact at Collins, expressed the belief that ''The Lord of the Rings'' itself  " urgently wanted cutting " , Tolkien eventually demanded that they publish the book in 1952. Collins did not; and so Tolkien wrote to Allen and Unwin, saying,  " I would gladly consider the publication of any part of the stuff " , fearing his work would never see the light of day.  
 
 For publication, the work was divided into three volumes to minimize any potential financial loss due to the high cost of type-setting and modest anticipated sales: ''The Fellowship of the Ring'' (Books I and II), ''The Two Towers'' (Books III and IV), and ''The Return of the King'' (Books V and VI plus six appendices).     Delays in producing appendices, Tolkien's maps|maps and especially an index led to the volumes being published later than originally hoped – on 29 July 1954, on 11 November 1954 and on 20 October 1955 respectively in the United Kingdom. In the United States, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt|Houghton Mifflin published ''The Fellowship of the Ring'' on 21 October 1954, ''The Two Towers'' on 21 April 1955, and ''The Return of the King'' on 5 January 1956.  The Fellowship of the Ring: Being the First Part of The Lord of the Rings] (publication history)   
 
 ''The Return of the King'' was especially delayed as Tolkien revised the ending and prepared appendices (some of which had to be left out because of space constraints). Tolkien did not like the title ''The Return of the King'', believing it gave away too much of the storyline, but deferred to his publisher's preference.  " From Book to Script " '', The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring Appendices'' (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2002.   Tolkien wrote that the title ''The Two Towers''  " can be left ambiguous, "  , letter #140 to Rayner Unwin, 17 August 1953   but considered naming the two as Isengard#Orthanc tower|Orthanc and Barad-dûr, Minas Tirith and Barad-dûr, or Orthanc and the Minor places in Middle-earth#Tower of Cirith Ungol|Tower of Cirith Ungol.  , letter #143 to Rayner Unwin, 22 January 1954   However, a month later he wrote a note published at the end of ''The Fellowship of the Ring'' and later drew a cover illustration, both of which identified the pair as Minas Morgul and Orthanc.  " The second part is called ''The Two Towers'', since the events recounted in it are dominated by Orthanc, ..., and the fortress of Minas Morgul... "     
 
 Tolkien was initially opposed to titles being given to each two-book volume, preferring instead the use of book titles: e.g. ''The Lord of the Rings'': Vol. 1, ''The Ring Sets Out'' and ''The Ring Goes South''; Vol. 2, ''The Treason of Isengard'' and ''The Ring Goes East''; Vol. 3, ''The War of the Ring'' and ''The End of the Third Age''. However, these individual book titles were dropped, and after pressure from his publishers, Tolkien suggested the volume titles: Vol. 1, ''The Shadow Grows''; Vol. 2, ''The Ring in the Shadow''; Vol. 3, ''The War of the Ring'' or ''The Return of the King''.  , letter #137, #140, #143 all to Rayner Unwin, his publisher, in 1953-4     
 
 Because the three-volume binding was so widely distributed, the work is often referred to as the ''Lord of the Rings''  " trilogy " . In a letter to the poet W. H. Auden, who famously reviewed the final volume in 1956,     Tolkien himself made use of the term  " trilogy "  for the work  , letter #163 to W. H. Auden, 7 June 1955   though he did at other times consider this incorrect, as it was written and conceived as a single book.  , letter #149 to Rayner Unwin, 9 September 1954   It is often called a novel; however, Tolkien objected to this term as he viewed it as a heroic romance.  , letter #239 to Peter Szabo Szentmihalyi, draft, October 1971  
 
 The books were published under a profit-sharing arrangement, whereby Tolkien would not receive an advance or royalties until the books had broken even, after which he would take a large share of the profits.     It has ultimately become one of the best-selling novels ever written  , with 50 million copies sold by 2003     and over 150 million copies sold by 2007.   The work was published in the UK by Allen  &  Unwin until 1990, when the publisher and its assets were acquired by HarperCollins.       
 
 ===Editions and revisions=== 
 
 In the early 1960s Donald A. Wollheim, science fiction editor of the paperback publisher Ace Books, claimed that ''The Lord of the Rings'' was not protected in the United States under Copyright law of the United States|American copyright law because Houghton Mifflin, the US hardcover publisher, had neglected to copyright the work in the United States.        Then, in 1965, Ace Books proceeded to publish an edition, unauthorized by Tolkien and without paying royalties to him. Tolkien took issue with this and quickly notified his fans of this objection.     Grass-roots pressure from these fans became so great that Ace Books withdrew their edition and made a nominal payment to Tolkien.     , letters #270, #273 and #277  
 
 File:Remington_Covers_for_Ballantine_Lord_of_the_Rings_1960s.jpg|thumb|upright=1.2|Barbara Remington's cover illustrations for the Ballantine Books|Ballantine paperback version  " achieved mass-cult status "  on American college campuses in the 1960s.   They were parodied by Michael K. Frith's cover design for the 1969 ''Bored of the Rings''.         
 
 Authorized editions followed from Ballantine Books and Houghton Mifflin to tremendous commercial success. Tolkien undertook various textual revisions to produce a version of the book that would be published with his consent and establish an unquestioned US copyright. This text became the Second Edition of ''The Lord of the Rings'', published in 1965.   The first Ballantine paperback edition was printed in October that year, selling a quarter of a million copies within ten months. On 4 September 1966, the novel debuted on ''The New York Times''s Paperback Bestsellers list as number three, and was number one by 4 December, a position it held for eight weeks.  [ & pg=PT98 Medievalist Comics and the American Century]    Houghton Mifflin editions after 1994 consolidate variant revisions by Tolkien, and corrections supervised by Christopher Tolkien, which resulted, after some initial glitches, in a computer-based unified text.  " Notes on the text "  pp. xi–xiii, Douglas A. Anderson, in the 1994 HarperCollins edition of ''The Fellowship of the Ring.''  
 
 In 2004, for the 50th Anniversary Edition, Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull, under supervision from Christopher Tolkien, studied and revised the text to eliminate as many errors and inconsistencies as possible, some of which had been introduced by well-meaning compositors of the first printing in 1954, and never been corrected. The 2005 edition of the book contained further corrections noticed by the editors and submitted by readers. Yet more corrections were made in the 60th Anniversary Edition in 2014.     Several editions, including the 50th Anniversary Edition, print the whole work in one volume, with the result that pagination varies widely over the various editions.    
 
 ===Posthumous publication of drafts=== 
 From 1988 to 1992 Christopher Tolkien published the surviving drafts of ''The Lord of The Rings'', chronicling and illuminating with commentary the stages of the text's development, in volumes 6–9 of his History of Middle-earth series. The four volumes carry the titles ''The Return of the Shadow'', ''The Treason of Isengard'', ''The War of the Ring'', and ''Sauron Defeated''.    
 
 ===Translations=== 
  
 
 The work has been translated, with varying degrees of success, into at least 38, and reportedly at least 70, languages.     Tolkien, an expert in philology, examined many of these translations, and made comments on each that reflect both the translation process and his work. As he was unhappy with some choices made by early translators, such as the Translation of The Lord of the Rings into Swedish|Swedish translation by Åke Ohlmarks,  , letters #228 and #229 to Allen  &  Unwin, 24 January 1961 and 23 February 1961   Tolkien wrote a  " Guide to the Names in The Lord of the Rings "  (1967). Because ''The Lord of the Rings'' purports to be a translation of the fictitious ''Red Book of Westmarch'', using the English language to represent the Westron of the  " original " , Tolkien suggested that translators attempt to capture the interplay between English and the invented nomenclature of the English work, and gave several examples along with general guidance.     
 
 ==Reception== 
  
 
 ===1950s=== 
 
 Early reviews for ''The Lord of the Rings'' were mixed. The initial review in the ''Sunday Telegraph'' described it as  " among the greatest works of imaginative fiction of the twentieth century " .     The ''The Sunday Times (UK)|Sunday Times'' echoed this sentiment, stating that  " the English-speaking world is divided into those who have read ''The Lord of the Rings'' and ''The Hobbit'' and those who are going to read them. "   The ''New York Herald Tribune'' appeared to predict the books' popularity, writing in its review that they were  " destined to outlast our time " .     W. H. Auden, a former pupil of Tolkien's and an admirer of his writings, regarded ''The Lord of the Rings'' as a  " masterpiece " , further stating that in some cases it outdid the achievement of John Milton's ''Paradise Lost''.     Kenneth F. Slater wrote in Nebula Science Fiction, April 1955,  " ... if you don't read it, you have missed one of the finest books of its type ever to appear " .       
 
 Even within Tolkien's literary group, The Inklings, the work had a mixed reception. Hugo Dyson complained loudly at its readings,     Dyson's actual comment, bowdlerized in the TV version, was  " Not another fucking Elf! "     whereas C. S. Lewis had very different feelings, writing,  " here are beauties which pierce like swords or burn like cold iron. Here is a book which will break your heart. "   Lewis observed that the writing is rich, in that some of the 'good' characters have darker sides, and likewise some of the villains have  " good impulses " .  C. S. Lewis, quoted in Christina Scull  &  Wayne Hammond (2006), ''The J. R. R. Tolkien Companion and Guide'', HarperCollins, article 'The Lord of the Rings', § Reviews, p. 549;    Despite the mixed reviews and the lack of a paperback until the 1960s, ''The Lord of the Rings'' initially sold well in hardback.  
 
 ===Later=== 
 
 Judith Shulevitz, writing in ''The New York Times'', criticized the  " pedantry "  of Tolkien's literary style, saying that he  " formulated a high-minded belief in the importance of his mission as a literary preservationist, which turns out to be death to literature itself " .     The critic Richard Jenkyns, writing in ''The New Republic'', criticized the work for a lack of psychological depth. Both the characters and the work itself were, according to Jenkyns,  " anemic, and lacking in fibre " .     The science fiction author David Brin interprets the work as holding unquestioning devotion to a traditional hierarchical social structure.     In his essay  " Epic Pooh " , fantasy author Michael Moorcock critiques the world-view displayed by the book as deeply conservative, in both the  " paternalism "  of the narrative voice and the power structures in the narrative.     Tom Shippey, like Tolkien an English philologist, notes the wide gulf between Tolkien's supporters, both popular and academic, and his literary detractors, and attempts to explain in detail both why the literary establishment disliked ''The Lord of the Rings'', and the work's subtlety, themes, and merits, including the Impression of depth in The Lord of the Rings|impression of depth that it conveys.    
 
 ===Awards=== 
 
 In 1957, ''The Lord of the Rings'' was awarded the International Fantasy Award. Despite its numerous detractors, the publication of the Ace Books and Ballantine Books|Ballantine paperbacks helped ''The Lord of the Rings'' become immensely popular in the United States in the 1960s. The book has remained so ever since, ranking as one of the most popular works of fiction of the twentieth century, judged by both sales and reader surveys.     In the 2003  " Big Read "  survey conducted in Britain by the BBC, ''The Lord of the Rings'' was found to be the  " Nation's best-loved book " . In similar 2004 polls both Germany     and Australia     chose ''The Lord of the Rings'' as their favourite book. In a 1999 poll of Amazon.com customers, ''The Lord of the Rings'' was judged to be their favourite  " book of the millennium " .     In 2019, the ''BBC News'' listed ''The Lord of the Rings'' on its BBC list of 100 'most inspiring' novels|list of the 100 most influential novels.    
 
 ==Adaptations== 
  
 
 ''The Lord of the Rings'' has been adapted for radio, stage, film and television. 
 
 === Radio === 
 The book has been adapted for radio four times. In 1955 and 1956, the BBC broadcast ''The Lord of the Rings (1955 radio series)|The Lord of the Rings'', a 13-part radio adaptation of the story. In the 1960s radio station WBAI produced a short Adaptations of The Lord of the Rings#Audio|radio adaptation. A 1979 dramatization of ''The Lord of the Rings (1979 radio series)|The Lord of the Rings'' was broadcast in the United States and subsequently issued on tape and CD. In 1981, the BBC broadcast ''The Lord of the Rings (1981 radio series)|The Lord of the Rings'', a new dramatization in 26 half-hour instalments.       
 
 === Film and television === 
  
 
 A variety of filmmakers considered adapting Tolkien's book, among them Stanley Kubrick, who thought it unfilmable,     See also interview in  " Show "  magazine vol. 1, Number 1 1970   Michelangelo Antonioni,     Heinz Edelmann,     and John Boorman.  Taylor, Patrick (19 January 2014). [ Best Films Never Made #8: John Boorman's The Lord of the Rings. " ]  ''OneRoomWithaView.com''. Retrieved 16 December 2018.    
 A Swedish live action television film, ''Sagan om ringen (1971 film)|Sagan om ringen'', was broadcast in 1971.  ''K-Special'',  " [ I trollkarlens hatt]  "  (at 24m30s), Sveriges television, 23 October 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015.  
 In 1978, Ralph Bakshi made an animated The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)|film version covering ''The Fellowship of the Ring'' and part of ''The Two Towers'', to mostly poor reviews.     In 1980, Rankin/Bass Productions|Rankin/Bass released The Return of the King (1980 film)|an animated TV special based on the closing chapters of ''The Return of the King'', gaining mixed reviews.         
 In Finland, a live action television miniseries, ''Hobitit'', was broadcast in 1993 based on ''The Lord of the Rings'', with a flashback to Bilbo's encounter with Gollum in ''The Hobbit''.        
 
 A far more successful adaptation was Peter Jackson's live action The Lord of the Rings (film series)|''The Lord of the Rings'' film trilogy, produced by New Line Cinema and released in three instalments as ''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (2001), ''The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers'' (2002), and ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' (2003). All three parts won multiple Academy Awards, including consecutive Academy Award for Best Picture|Best Picture nominations. The final instalment of this trilogy was the second film to break the one-billion-dollar barrier and won a total of 11 Academy Awards|Oscars (something only two other films in history, ''Ben-Hur (1959 film)|Ben-Hur'' and ''Titanic (1997 film)|Titanic'', have accomplished), including Academy Award for Best Picture|Best Picture, Academy Award for Best Director|Best Director and Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay|Best Adapted Screenplay.     ''The Return of the King'' peak positions 
 *U.S. and Canada:  
 *Worldwide:    Commentators including Tolkien scholars, literary critics and film critics are divided on The Lord of the Rings: film versus book|how faithfully Jackson adapted Tolkien's work, or whether a film version is inevitably different, and if so the reasons for any changes, and the effectiveness of the result.    
 
 ''The Hunt for Gollum'', a 2009 film by Chris Bouchard,        and the 2009 ''Born of Hope'', written by Paula DiSante and directed by Kate Madison, are fan films based on details in the appendices of ''The Lord of the Rings''.    
 
 In 2017, Amazon (company)|Amazon acquired the global television rights to ''The Lord of the Rings'' for Lord of the Rings (TV series)|a multi-season television series of new stories set before ''The Hobbit'' and ''The Lord of the Rings,    '' based on Tolkien's descriptions of events of the Second Age of Middle-earth.    
 
 === Stage === 
 
 In 1990, Recorded Books published an audiobook|audio version of ''The Lord of the Rings'',     read by the British actor Rob Inglis. A large-scale musical theatre adaptation, ''The Lord of the Rings (musical)|The Lord of the Rings'', was first staged in Toronto|Toronto, Ontario, Canada in 2006 and opened in London in June 2007; it was a commercial failure.    
 
 ==Legacy== 
 
  
 
 ===Influence on fantasy === 
  
 
 The enormous popularity of Tolkien's work expanded the demand for fantasy. Largely thanks to ''The Lord of the Rings,'' the genre flowered throughout the 1960s and enjoys popularity to the present day. The opus has spawned many imitations, such as ''The Sword of Shannara'', which Lin Carter called  " the single most cold-blooded, complete rip-off of another book that I have ever read " .    
 ''The Legend of Zelda'', which popularized the action-adventure game genre in the 1980s, was inspired by ''The Lord of the Rings'' among other fantasy books.        ''Dungeons  &  Dragons'', which popularized the role-playing game genre in the 1970s, features several races from ''The Lord of the Rings,'' including halflings (hobbits), elves, dwarves, Half-elven|half-elves, orcs, and dragons. However, Gary Gygax, lead designer of the game, maintained that he was influenced very little by ''The Lord of the Rings'', stating that he included these elements as a marketing move to draw on the popularity the work enjoyed at the time he was developing the game.    
 Because Dungeons  &  Dragons has gone on to influence many popular role-playing video games, the influence of ''The Lord of the Rings'' extends to many of them, with titles such as ''Dragon Quest'',        the ''Ultima (series)|Ultima'' series, ''EverQuest'', the ''Warcraft'' series, and ''The Elder Scrolls'' series of games     as well as Middle-earth in video games|video games set in Middle-earth itself. 
 
 ===Music=== 
 
 In 1965, the songwriter Donald Swann, best known for his collaboration with Michael Flanders as Flanders  &  Swann, set six poems from ''The Lord of the Rings'' and one from ''The Adventures of Tom Bombadil'' ( " Errantry " ) to music. When Swann met with Tolkien to play the songs for his approval, Tolkien suggested for  " Namárië "  (Galadriel's lament) a setting reminiscent of plain chant, which Swann accepted.  Tolkien had recorded a version of his theme on a friend's tape recorder in 1952. This was later issued by Caedmon Records in 1975 as part of ''J.R.R. Tolkien reads and sings The Lord of the Rings'' (LP recording TC1478).   The songs were published in 1967 as ''The Road Goes Ever On|The Road Goes Ever On: A Song Cycle'',     and a recording of the songs performed by singer William Elvin with Swann on piano was issued that same year by Caedmon Records as ''Poems and Songs of Middle Earth''.    
 
 Rock bands of the 1970s were musically and lyrically inspired by the fantasy-embracing counter-culture of the time. The British rock band Led Zeppelin recorded several songs that contain explicit references to ''The Lord of the Rings'', such as mentioning Gollum and Mordor in  " Ramble On " , the Misty Mountains in  " Misty Mountain Hop " , and Ringwraiths in  " The Battle of Evermore " . In 1970, the Swedish musician Bo Hansson released an instrumental concept album entitled ''Sagan om ringen'' ( " The Saga of the Ring " , the title of the Swedish translation at the time).     The album was subsequently released internationally as ''Music Inspired by Lord of the Rings (Bo Hansson album)|Music Inspired by Lord of the Rings'' in 1972.   From the 1980s onwards, many heavy metal acts have been influenced by Tolkien.    
 
 In 1988, the Dutch composer and trombonist Johan de Meij completed his ''Symphony No. 1  " The Lord of the Rings " ''. It had 5 movements, titled  " Gandalf " ,  " Lothlórien " ,  " Gollum " ,  " Journey in the Dark " , and  " Hobbits " .    
 
 ===Impact on popular culture=== 
 File:Matamata sign.jpg|thumb| " Welcome to Hobbiton "  sign in Matamata, New Zealand, where Peter Jackson's film version was shot 
 
 ''The Lord of the Rings'' has had a profound and wide-ranging impact on popular culture, beginning with its publication in the 1950s, but especially during the 1960s and 1970s, when young people embraced it as a counterculture|countercultural saga.      " Frodo Lives! "  and  " Gandalf for President "  were two phrases popular amongst United States Tolkien fandom|Tolkien fans during this time.     Its impact is such that the words  " Tolkienian "  and  " Tolkienesque "  have entered the ''Oxford English Dictionary'', and many of his fantasy terms, formerly little-known in English, such as  " Orc "  and  " Warg " , have become widespread in that domain.    
 Among its effects are numerous Parody|parodies, especially ''Harvard Lampoon'' ''Bored of the Rings'', which has had the distinction of remaining continuously in print from its publication in 1969, and of being translated into at least 11 languages.    
 
 In 1969, Tolkien sold the merchandising rights to ''The Lord of The Rings'' (and ''The Hobbit'') to United Artists under an agreement stipulating a lump sum payment of £10,000     plus a 7.5% royalty after costs,     payable to Allen  &  Unwin and the author.     In 1976, three years after the author's death, United Artists sold the rights to Saul Zaentz Company, who now trade as Tolkien Enterprises. Since then all  " authorised "  merchandise has been signed off by Tolkien Enterprises, although the intellectual property|intellectual property rights of the specific likenesses of characters and other imagery from various adaptations is generally held by the adaptors.    
 
 Outside any commercial exploitation from adaptations, from the late 1960s onwards there has been an increasing variety of original licensed merchandise, from posters and calendars created by illustrators such as Barbara Remington.    
 
 The work was named Britain's best novel of all time in the BBC's The Big Read.     In 2015, the BBC ranked ''The Lord of the Rings'' 26th on its list of the 100 greatest British novels.     It was included in ''Le Monde''s list of  " Le Monde's 100 Books of the Century|100 Books of the Century " .    
 
 ==Notes== 
  
 
 ==References== 
 
 ===Primary=== 
 ::''This list identifies each item's location in Tolkien's writings.'' 
  
 
 ===Secondary=== 
  
 
 ==Sources== 
 
 *  
 *  
 *  
 *  
 * Christopher Tolkien (ed.), ''The History of The Lord of the Rings'', 4 vols (1988–1992). 
 *  
 
 ==External links== 
  
  
  
 * [ Tolkien website of Harper Collins] (the British publisher) 
 * [ Tolkien website of Houghton Mifflin] (the American publisher) 
 * [ Lord of the Rings, The] at the The Encyclopedia of Fantasy|Encyclopedia of Fantasy 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 Category:The Lord of the Rings|  
 Category:Mythopoeia 
 Category:1954 fantasy novels 
 Category:1954 British novels 
 Category:English novels 
 Category:British adventure novels 
 Category:Sequel novels 
 Category:Epic novels 
 Category:British fantasy novels 
 Category:British novels adapted into films 
 Category:BILBY Award-winning works 
 Category:Allen  &  Unwin books 
 Category:Three-volume novels 
 Category:Middle-earth books 
 Category:High fantasy novels 
 Category:English fantasy novels 
 Category:Novels set in fictional countries 
 Category:Middle-earth 
 Category:Books by J. R. R. Tolkien 
 Category:Novels set in prehistory